 Anna Karenina

"Matvey, my sister Anna Arkadyevna will be here tomorrow," he said,
checking for a minute the sleek, plump hand of the barber, cutting a
pink path through his long, curly whiskers.

"Thank God!" said Matvey, showing by this response that he, like his
master, realized the significance of this arrival—that is, that Anna
Arkadyevna, the sister he was so fond of, might bring about a
reconciliation between husband and wife.

"Dolly!" he repeated, with a quiver in his voice. "Anna is coming
today."

"Matvey!" he shouted. "Arrange everything with Darya in the sitting room
for Anna Arkadyevna," he said to Matvey when he came in.

Stepan Arkadyevitch had learned easily at school, thanks to his
excellent abilities, but he had been idle and mischievous, and therefore
was one of the lowest in his class. But in spite of his habitually
dissipated mode of life, his inferior grade in the service, and his
comparative youth, he occupied the honorable and lucrative position of
president of one of the government boards at Moscow. This post he had
received through his sister Anna’s husband, Alexey Alexandrovitch
Karenin, who held one of the most important positions in the ministry to
whose department the Moscow office belonged. But if Karenin had not got
his brother-in-law this berth, then through a hundred other
personages—brothers, sisters, cousins, uncles, and aunts—Stiva Oblonsky
would have received this post, or some other similar one, together with
the salary of six thousand absolutely needful for him, as his affairs,
in spite of his wife’s considerable property, were in an embarrassed
condition.

"_Honi soit qui mal y pense!_ My sister Anna."

"Anna Arkadyevna," the countess said in explanation to her son, "has a
little son eight years old, I believe, and she has never been parted
from him before, and she keeps fretting over leaving him."

"Ah, how awful! Ah, Anna, if you had seen it! Ah, how awful!" he said.

"What is it, Anna?" he asked, when they had driven a few hundred yards.

"Yes?" said Anna softly. "Come now, let us talk of you," she added,
tossing her head, as though she would physically shake off something
superfluous oppressing her. "Let us talk of your affairs. I got your
letter, and here I am."

When Anna went into the room, Dolly was sitting in the little
drawing-room with a white-headed fat little boy, already like his
father, giving him a lesson in French reading. As the boy read, he kept
twisting and trying to tear off a button that was nearly off his jacket.
His mother had several times taken his hand from it, but the fat little
hand went back to the button again. His mother pulled the button off and
put it in her pocket.

Dolly was crushed by her sorrow, utterly swallowed up by it. Still she
did not forget that Anna, her sister-in-law, was the wife of one of the
most important personages in Petersburg, and was a Petersburg _grande
dame_. And, thanks to this circumstance, she did not carry out her
threat to her husband—that is to say, she remembered that her
sister-in-law was coming. "And, after all, Anna is in no wise to blame,"
thought Dolly. "I know nothing of her except the very best, and I have
seen nothing but kindness and affection from her towards myself." It was
true that as far as she could recall her impressions at Petersburg at
the Karenins’, she did not like their household itself; there was
something artificial in the whole framework of their family life. "But
why should I not receive her? If only she doesn’t take it into her head
to console me!" thought Dolly. "All consolation and counsel and
Christian forgiveness, all that I have thought over a thousand times,
and it’s all no use."

All these days Dolly had been alone with her children. She did not want
to talk of her sorrow, but with that sorrow in her heart she could not
talk of outside matters. She knew that in one way or another she would
tell Anna everything, and she was alternately glad at the thought of
speaking freely, and angry at the necessity of speaking of her
humiliation with her, his sister, and of hearing her ready-made phrases
of good advice and comfort. She had been on the lookout for her,
glancing at her watch every minute, and, as so often happens, let slip
just that minute when her visitor arrived, so that she did not hear the
bell.

"I am glad, too," said Dolly, faintly smiling, and trying by the
expression of Anna’s face to find out whether she knew. "Most likely she
knows," she thought, noticing the sympathy in Anna’s face. "Well, come
along, I’ll take you to your room," she went on, trying to defer as long
as possible the moment of confidences.

"Is this Grisha? Heavens, how he’s grown!" said Anna; and kissing him,
never taking her eyes off Dolly, she stood still and flushed a little.
"No, please, let us stay here."

"I?.... Yes," said Anna. "Merciful heavens, Tanya! You’re the same age
as my Seryozha," she added, addressing the little girl as she ran in.
She took her in her arms and kissed her. "Delightful child, delightful!
Show me them all."

After seeing the children, they sat down, alone now, in the drawing
room, to coffee. Anna took the tray, and then pushed it away from her.

Dolly looked coldly at Anna; she was waiting now for phrases of
conventional sympathy, but Anna said nothing of the sort.

And directly she had said this, her face suddenly softened. Anna lifted
the wasted, thin hand of Dolly, kissed it and said:

Sympathy and love unfeigned were visible on Anna’s face.

"Oh, yes, I understand! I understand! Dolly, dearest, I do understand,"
said Anna, pressing her hand.

"Oh, no!" Anna interposed quickly. "He’s to be pitied, he’s weighed down
by remorse..."

"Yes. I know him. I could not look at him without feeling sorry for him.
We both know him. He’s good-hearted, but he’s proud, and now he’s so
humiliated. What touched me most..." (and here Anna guessed what would
touch Dolly most) "he’s tortured by two things: that he’s ashamed for
the children’s sake, and that, loving you—yes, yes, loving you beyond
everything on earth," she hurriedly interrupted Dolly, who would have
answered—"he has hurt you, pierced you to the heart. ‘No, no, she cannot
forgive me,’ he keeps saying."

"She’s young, you see, she’s pretty," she went on. "Do you know, Anna,
my youth and my beauty are gone, taken by whom? By him and his children.
I have worked for him, and all I had has gone in his service, and now of
course any fresh, vulgar creature has more charm for him. No doubt they
talked of me together, or, worse still, they were silent. Do you
understand?"

"What’s to be done? Think for me, Anna, help me. I have thought over
everything, and I see nothing."

Anna could think of nothing, but her heart responded instantly to each
word, to each change of expression of her sister-in-law.

"One thing I would say," began Anna. "I am his sister, I know his
character, that faculty of forgetting everything, everything" (she waved
her hand before her forehead), "that faculty for being completely
carried away, but for completely repenting too. He cannot believe it, he
cannot comprehend now how he can have acted as he did."

"No," Dolly was beginning, but Anna cut her short, kissing her hand once
more.

"I don’t know, I can’t judge.... Yes, I can," said Anna, thinking a
moment; and grasping the position in her thought and weighing it in her
inner balance, she added: "Yes, I can, I can, I can. Yes, I could
forgive it. I could not be the same, no; but I could forgive it, and
forgive it as though it had never been, never been at all..."

"Oh, of course," Dolly interposed quickly, as though saying what she had
more than once thought, "else it would not be forgiveness. If one
forgives, it must be completely, completely. Come, let us go; I’ll take
you to your room," she said, getting up, and on the way she embraced
Anna. "My dear, how glad I am you came. It has made things better, ever
so much better."

The whole of that day Anna spent at home, that’s to say at the
Oblonskys’, and received no one, though some of her acquaintances had
already heard of her arrival, and came to call the same day. Anna spent
the whole morning with Dolly and the children. She merely sent a brief
note to her brother to tell him that he must not fail to dine at home.
"Come, God is merciful," she wrote.

Immediately after dinner Kitty came in. She knew Anna Arkadyevna, but
only very slightly, and she came now to her sister’s with some
trepidation, at the prospect of meeting this fashionable Petersburg
lady, whom everyone spoke so highly of. But she made a favorable
impression on Anna Arkadyevna—she saw that at once. Anna was
unmistakably admiring her loveliness and her youth: before Kitty knew
where she was she found herself not merely under Anna’s sway, but in
love with her, as young girls do fall in love with older and married
women. Anna was not like a fashionable lady, nor the mother of a boy of
eight years old. In the elasticity of her movements, the freshness and
the unflagging eagerness which persisted in her face, and broke out in
her smile and her glance, she would rather have passed for a girl of
twenty, had it not been for a serious and at times mournful look in her
eyes, which struck and attracted Kitty. Kitty felt that Anna was
perfectly simple and was concealing nothing, but that she had another
higher world of interests inaccessible to her, complex and poetic.

After dinner, when Dolly went away to her own room, Anna rose quickly
and went up to her brother, who was just lighting a cigar.

"Come, come, as we were sitting before," said Anna Arkadyevna, sitting
down in her place.

"Why, are there balls where one always enjoys oneself?" Anna said, with
tender irony.

"No, my dear, for me there are no balls now where one enjoys oneself,"
said Anna, and Kitty detected in her eyes that mysterious world which
was not open to her. "For me there are some less dull and tiresome."

"Why should not _I_ be dull at a ball?" inquired Anna.

Kitty perceived that Anna knew what answer would follow.

Anna had the faculty of blushing. She blushed a little, and said:

"And why in lilac precisely?" asked Anna, smiling. "Now, children, run
along, run along. Do you hear? Miss Hoole is calling you to tea," she
said, tearing the children from her, and sending them off to the dining
room.

"Oh! what a happy time you are at," pursued Anna. "I remember, and I
know that blue haze like the mist on the mountains in Switzerland. That
mist which covers everything in that blissful time when childhood is
just ending, and out of that vast circle, happy and gay, there is a path
growing narrower and narrower, and it is delightful and alarming to
enter the ballroom, bright and splendid as it is.... Who has not been
through it?"

"I know something. Stiva told me, and I congratulate you. I liked him so
much," Anna continued. "I met Vronsky at the railway station."

"Oh, a great deal! And I know that he’s her favorite; still one can see
how chivalrous he is.... Well, for instance, she told me that he had
wanted to give up all his property to his brother, that he had done
something extraordinary when he was quite a child, saved a woman out of
the water. He’s a hero, in fact," said Anna, smiling and recollecting
the two hundred roubles he had given at the station.

"She pressed me very much to go and see her," Anna went on; "and I shall
be glad to go to see her tomorrow. Stiva is staying a long while in
Dolly’s room, thank God," Anna added, changing the subject, and getting
up, Kitty fancied, displeased with something.

"No, I’m first! No, I!" screamed the children, who had finished tea,
running up to their Aunt Anna.

"All together," said Anna, and she ran laughing to meet them, and
embraced and swung round all the throng of swarming children, shrieking
with delight.

"I am afraid you’ll be cold upstairs," observed Dolly, addressing Anna;
"I want to move you downstairs, and we shall be nearer."

"Oh, please, don’t trouble about me," answered Anna, looking intently
into Dolly’s face, trying to make out whether there had been a
reconciliation or not.

From his tone both Kitty and Anna knew that a reconciliation had taken
place.

"I want to move Anna downstairs, but we must hang up blinds. No one
knows how to do it; I must see to it myself," answered Dolly addressing
him.

"God knows whether they are fully reconciled," thought Anna, hearing her
tone, cold and composed.

"Yes, they must be reconciled," thought Anna.

"Full, full reconciliation, full," thought Anna; "thank God!" and
rejoicing that she was the cause of it, she went up to Dolly and kissed
her.

At half-past nine o’clock a particularly joyful and pleasant family
conversation over the tea-table at the Oblonskys’ was broken up by an
apparently simple incident. But this simple incident for some reason
struck everyone as strange. Talking about common acquaintances in
Petersburg, Anna got up quickly.

"Sure to be someone with papers for me," put in Stepan Arkadyevitch.
When Anna was passing the top of the staircase, a servant was running up
to announce the visitor, while the visitor himself was standing under a
lamp. Anna glancing down at once recognized Vronsky, and a strange
feeling of pleasure and at the same time of dread of something stirred
in her heart. He was standing still, not taking off his coat, pulling
something out of his pocket. At the instant when she was just facing the
stairs, he raised his eyes, caught sight of her, and into the expression
of his face there passed a shade of embarrassment and dismay. With a
slight inclination of her head she passed, hearing behind her Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s loud voice calling him to come up, and the quiet, soft,
and composed voice of Vronsky refusing.

When Anna returned with the album, he was already gone, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch was telling them that he had called to inquire about the
dinner they were giving next day to a celebrity who had just arrived.
"And nothing would induce him to come up. What a queer fellow he is!"
added Stepan Arkadyevitch.

Kitty blushed. She thought that she was the only person who knew why he
had come, and why he would not come up. "He has been at home," she
thought, "and didn’t find me, and thought I should be here, but he did
not come up because he thought it late, and Anna’s here."

All of them looked at each other, saying nothing, and began to look at
Anna’s album.

There was nothing either exceptional or strange in a man’s calling at
half-past nine on a friend to inquire details of a proposed dinner party
and not coming in, but it seemed strange to all of them. Above all, it
seemed strange and not right to Anna.

She smiled at his praise, and continued to look about the room over his
shoulder. She was not like a girl at her first ball, for whom all faces
in the ballroom melt into one vision of fairyland. And she was not a
girl who had gone the stale round of balls till every face in the
ballroom was familiar and tiresome. But she was in the middle stage
between these two; she was excited, and at the same time she had
sufficient self-possession to be able to observe. In the left corner of
the ballroom she saw the cream of society gathered together.
There—incredibly naked—was the beauty Lidi, Korsunsky’s wife; there was
the lady of the house; there shone the bald head of Krivin, always to be
found where the best people were. In that direction gazed the young men,
not venturing to approach. There, too, she descried Stiva, and there she
saw the exquisite figure and head of Anna in a black velvet gown. And
_he_ was there. Kitty had not seen him since the evening she refused
Levin. With her long-sighted eyes, she knew him at once, and was even
aware that he was looking at her.

And Korsunsky began waltzing with measured steps straight towards the
group in the left corner, continually saying, "Pardon, mesdames, pardon,
pardon, mesdames"; and steering his course through the sea of lace,
tulle, and ribbon, and not disarranging a feather, he turned his partner
sharply round, so that her slim ankles, in light transparent stockings,
were exposed to view, and her train floated out in fan shape and covered
Krivin’s knees. Korsunsky bowed, set straight his open shirt front, and
gave her his arm to conduct her to Anna Arkadyevna. Kitty, flushed, took
her train from Krivin’s knees, and, a little giddy, looked round,
seeking Anna. Anna was not in lilac, as Kitty had so urgently wished,
but in a black, low-cut, velvet gown, showing her full throat and
shoulders, that looked as though carved in old ivory, and her rounded
arms, with tiny, slender wrists. The whole gown was trimmed with
Venetian guipure. On her head, among her black hair—her own, with no
false additions—was a little wreath of pansies, and a bouquet of the
same in the black ribbon of her sash among white lace. Her coiffure was
not striking. All that was noticeable was the little wilful tendrils of
her curly hair that would always break free about her neck and temples.
Round her well-cut, strong neck was a thread of pearls.

Kitty had been seeing Anna every day; she adored her, and had pictured
her invariably in lilac. But now seeing her in black, she felt that she
had not fully seen her charm. She saw her now as someone quite new and
surprising to her. Now she understood that Anna could not have been in
lilac, and that her charm was just that she always stood out against her
attire, that her dress could never be noticeable on her. And her black
dress, with its sumptuous lace, was not noticeable on her; it was only
the frame, and all that was seen was she—simple, natural, elegant, and
at the same time gay and eager.

"This is one of my most faithful supporters," said Korsunsky, bowing to
Anna Arkadyevna, whom he had not yet seen. "The princess helps to make
balls happy and successful. Anna Arkadyevna, a waltz?" he said, bending
down to her.

"Is there anyone we have not met? My wife and I are like white
wolves—everyone knows us," answered Korsunsky. "A waltz, Anna
Arkadyevna?"

"What is she vexed with him about?" thought Kitty, discerning that Anna
had intentionally not responded to Vronsky’s bow. Vronsky went up to
Kitty reminding her of the first quadrille, and expressing his regret
that he had not seen her all this time. Kitty gazed in admiration at
Anna waltzing, and listened to him. She expected him to ask her for a
waltz, but he did not, and she glanced wonderingly at him. He flushed
slightly, and hurriedly asked her to waltz, but he had only just put his
arm round her waist and taken the first step when the music suddenly
stopped. Kitty looked into his face, which was so close to her own, and
long afterwards—for several years after—that look, full of love, to
which he made no response, cut her to the heart with an agony of shame.

Vronsky and Kitty waltzed several times round the room. After the first
waltz Kitty went to her mother, and she had hardly time to say a few
words to Countess Nordston when Vronsky came up again for the first
quadrille. During the quadrille nothing of any significance was said:
there was disjointed talk between them of the Korsunskys, husband and
wife, whom he described very amusingly, as delightful children at forty,
and of the future town theater; and only once the conversation touched
her to the quick, when he asked her about Levin, whether he was here,
and added that he liked him so much. But Kitty did not expect much from
the quadrille. She looked forward with a thrill at her heart to the
mazurka. She fancied that in the mazurka everything must be decided. The
fact that he did not during the quadrille ask her for the mazurka did
not trouble her. She felt sure she would dance the mazurka with him as
she had done at former balls, and refused five young men, saying she was
engaged for the mazurka. The whole ball up to the last quadrille was for
Kitty an enchanted vision of delightful colors, sounds, and motions. She
only sat down when she felt too tired and begged for a rest. But as she
was dancing the last quadrille with one of the tiresome young men whom
she could not refuse, she chanced to be vis-a-vis with Vronsky and Anna.
She had not been near Anna again since the beginning of the evening, and
now again she saw her suddenly quite new and surprising. She saw in her
the signs of that excitement of success she knew so well in herself; she
saw that she was intoxicated with the delighted admiration she was
exciting. She knew that feeling and knew its signs, and saw them in
Anna; saw the quivering, flashing light in her eyes, and the smile of
happiness and excitement unconsciously playing on her lips, and the
deliberate grace, precision, and lightness of her movements.

"Who?" she asked herself. "All or one?" And not assisting the harassed
young man she was dancing with in the conversation, the thread of which
he had lost and could not pick up again, she obeyed with external
liveliness the peremptory shouts of Korsunsky starting them all into the
_grand rond_, and then into the _châine_, and at the same time she kept
watch with a growing pang at her heart. "No, it’s not the admiration of
the crowd has intoxicated her, but the adoration of one. And that one?
can it be he?" Every time he spoke to Anna the joyous light flashed into
her eyes, and the smile of happiness curved her red lips. she seemed to
make an effort to control herself, to try not to show these signs of
delight, but they came out on her face of themselves. "But what of him?"
Kitty looked at him and was filled with terror. What was pictured so
clearly to Kitty in the mirror of Anna’s face she saw in him. What had
become of his always self-possessed resolute manner, and the carelessly
serene expression of his face? Now every time he turned to her, he bent
his head, as though he would have fallen at her feet, and in his eyes
there was nothing but humble submission and dread. "I would not offend
you," his eyes seemed every time to be saying, "but I want to save
myself, and I don’t know how." On his face was a look such as Kitty had
never seen before.

Kitty danced in the first couple, and luckily for her she had not to
talk, because Korsunsky was all the time running about directing the
figure. Vronsky and Anna sat almost opposite her. She saw them with her
long-sighted eyes, and saw them, too, close by, when they met in the
figures, and the more she saw of them the more convinced was she that
her unhappiness was complete. She saw that they felt themselves alone in
that crowded room. And on Vronsky’s face, always so firm and
independent, she saw that look that had struck her, of bewilderment and
humble submissiveness, like the expression of an intelligent dog when it
has done wrong.

Anna smiled, and her smile was reflected by him. She grew thoughtful,
and he became serious. Some supernatural force drew Kitty’s eyes to
Anna’s face. She was fascinating in her simple black dress, fascinating
were her round arms with their bracelets, fascinating was her firm neck
with its thread of pearls, fascinating the straying curls of her loose
hair, fascinating the graceful, light movements of her little feet and
hands, fascinating was that lovely face in its eagerness, but there was
something terrible and cruel in her fascination.

In the middle of the mazurka, repeating a complicated figure, newly
invented by Korsunsky, Anna came forward into the center of the circle,
chose two gentlemen, and summoned a lady and Kitty. Kitty gazed at her
in dismay as she went up. Anna looked at her with drooping eyelids, and
smiled, pressing her hand. But, noticing that Kitty only responded to
her smile by a look of despair and amazement, she turned away from her,
and began gaily talking to the other lady.

Anna did not mean to stay to supper, but the master of the house began
to press her to do so.

"Nonsense, Anna Arkadyevna," said Korsunsky, drawing her bare arm under
the sleeve of his dress coat, "I’ve such an idea for a _cotillion! Un
bijou!_"

"No, I am not going to stay," answered Anna, smiling, but in spite of
her smile, both Korsunsky and the master of the house saw from her
resolute tone that she would not stay.

"No; why, as it is, I have danced more at your ball in Moscow than I
have all the winter in Petersburg," said Anna, looking round at Vronsky,
who stood near her. "I must rest a little before my journey."

"Yes, I suppose so," answered Anna, as it were wondering at the boldness
of his question; but the irrepressible, quivering brilliance of her eyes
and her smile set him on fire as she said it.

Anna Arkadyevna did not stay to supper, but went home.

After the ball, early next morning, Anna Arkadyevna sent her husband a
telegram that she was leaving Moscow the same day.

Kitty, too, did not come, sending a note that she had a headache. Dolly
and Anna dined alone with the children and the English governess.
Whether it was that the children were fickle, or that they had acute
senses, and felt that Anna was quite different that day from what she
had been when they had taken such a fancy to her, that she was not now
interested in them,—but they had abruptly dropped their play with their
aunt, and their love for her, and were quite indifferent that she was
going away. Anna was absorbed the whole morning in preparations for her
departure. She wrote notes to her Moscow acquaintances, put down her
accounts, and packed. Altogether Dolly fancied she was not in a placid
state of mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly knew well with
herself, and which does not come without cause, and for the most part
covers dissatisfaction with self. After dinner, Anna went up to her room
to dress, and Dolly followed her.

"I? Do you think so? I’m not queer, but I’m nasty. I am like that
sometimes. I keep feeling as if I could cry. It’s very stupid, but it’ll
pass off," said Anna quickly, and she bent her flushed face over a tiny
bag in which she was packing a nightcap and some cambric handkerchiefs.
Her eyes were particularly bright, and were continually swimming with
tears. "In the same way I didn’t want to leave Petersburg, and now I
don’t want to go away from here."

Anna looked at her with eyes wet with tears.

"If it had not been for you, God knows what would have happened! How
happy you are, Anna!" said Dolly. "Everything is clear and good in your
heart."

"I have!" said Anna suddenly, and, unexpectedly after her tears, a sly,
ironical smile curved her lips.

"No, he’s depressing. Do you know why I’m going today instead of
tomorrow? It’s a confession that weighs on me; I want to make it to
you," said Anna, letting herself drop definitely into an armchair, and
looking straight into Dolly’s face.

And to her surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing up to her ears, up
to the curly black ringlets on her neck.

"Yes," Anna went on. "Do you know why Kitty didn’t come to dinner? She’s
jealous of me. I have spoiled ... I’ve been the cause of that ball being
a torture to her instead of a pleasure. But truly, truly, it’s not my
fault, or only my fault a little bit," she said, daintily drawling the
words "a little bit."

Anna was hurt.

"Oh no, oh no! I’m not Stiva," she said, knitting her brows. "That’s why
I’m telling you, just because I could never let myself doubt myself for
an instant," said Anna.

"But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on his
side," Anna interrupted her. "And I am certain it will all be forgotten,
and Kitty will leave off hating me."

"All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I’m not very anxious for
this marriage for Kitty. And it’s better it should come to nothing, if
he, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you in a single day."

"Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!" said Anna, and again a deep
flush of pleasure came out on her face, when she heard the idea, that
absorbed her, put into words. "And so here I am going away, having made
an enemy of Kitty, whom I liked so much! Ah, how sweet she is! But
you’ll make it right, Dolly? Eh?"

Dolly could scarcely suppress a smile. She loved Anna, but she enjoyed
seeing that she too had her weaknesses.

"I did so want you all to care for me, as I do for you, and now I care
for you more than ever," said Anna, with tears in her eyes. "Ah, how
silly I am today!"

Anna’s emotionalism infected Dolly, and when she embraced her
sister-in-law for the last time, she whispered: "Remember, Anna, what
you’ve done for me—I shall never forget. And remember that I love you,
and shall always love you as my dearest friend!"

"I don’t know why," said Anna, kissing her and hiding her tears.

"Come, it’s all over, and thank God!" was the first thought that came to
Anna Arkadyevna, when she had said good-bye for the last time to her
brother, who had stood blocking up the entrance to the carriage till the
third bell rang. She sat down on her lounge beside Annushka, and looked
about her in the twilight of the sleeping-carriage. "Thank God! tomorrow
I shall see Seryozha and Alexey Alexandrovitch, and my life will go on
in the old way, all nice and as usual."

Still in the same anxious frame of mind, as she had been all that day,
Anna took pleasure in arranging herself for the journey with great care.
With her little deft hands she opened and shut her little red bag, took
out a cushion, laid it on her knees, and carefully wrapping up her feet,
settled herself comfortably. An invalid lady had already lain down to
sleep. Two other ladies began talking to Anna, and a stout elderly lady
tucked up her feet, and made observations about the heating of the
train. Anna answered a few words, but not foreseeing any entertainment
from the conversation, she asked Annushka to get a lamp, hooked it onto
the arm of her seat, and took from her bag a paper knife and an English
novel. At first her reading made no progress. The fuss and bustle were
disturbing; then when the train had started, she could not help
listening to the noises; then the snow beating on the left window and
sticking to the pane, and the sight of the muffled guard passing by,
covered with snow on one side, and the conversations about the terrible
snowstorm raging outside, distracted her attention. Farther on, it was
continually the same again and again: the same shaking and rattling, the
same snow on the window, the same rapid transitions from steaming heat
to cold, and back again to heat, the same passing glimpses of the same
figures in the twilight, and the same voices, and Anna began to read and
to understand what she read. Annushka was already dozing, the red bag on
her lap, clutched by her broad hands, in gloves, of which one was torn.
Anna Arkadyevna read and understood, but it was distasteful to her to
read, that is, to follow the reflection of other people’s lives. She had
too great a desire to live herself. If she read that the heroine of the
novel was nursing a sick man, she longed to move with noiseless steps
about the room of a sick man; if she read of a member of Parliament
making a speech, she longed to be delivering the speech; if she read of
how Lady Mary had ridden after the hounds, and had provoked her
sister-in-law, and had surprised everyone by her boldness, she too
wished to be doing the same. But there was no chance of doing anything;
and twisting the smooth paper knife in her little hands, she forced
herself to read.

The hero of the novel was already almost reaching his English happiness,
a baronetcy and an estate, and Anna was feeling a desire to go with him
to the estate, when she suddenly felt that _he_ ought to feel ashamed,
and that she was ashamed of the same thing. But what had he to be
ashamed of? "What have I to be ashamed of?" she asked herself in injured
surprise. She laid down the book and sank against the back of the chair,
tightly gripping the paper cutter in both hands. There was nothing. She
went over all her Moscow recollections. All were good, pleasant. She
remembered the ball, remembered Vronsky and his face of slavish
adoration, remembered all her conduct with him: there was nothing
shameful. And for all that, at the same point in her memories, the
feeling of shame was intensified, as though some inner voice, just at
the point when she thought of Vronsky, were saying to her, "Warm, very
warm, hot." "Well, what is it?" she said to herself resolutely, shifting
her seat in the lounge. "What does it mean? Am I afraid to look it
straight in the face? Why, what is it? Can it be that between me and
this officer boy there exist, or can exist, any other relations than
such as are common with every acquaintance?" She laughed contemptuously
and took up her book again; but now she was definitely unable to follow
what she read. She passed the paper knife over the window pane, then
laid its smooth, cool surface to her cheek, and almost laughed aloud at
the feeling of delight that all at once without cause came over her. She
felt as though her nerves were strings being strained tighter and
tighter on some sort of screwing peg. She felt her eyes opening wider
and wider, her fingers and toes twitching nervously, something within
oppressing her breathing, while all shapes and sounds seemed in the
uncertain half-light to strike her with unaccustomed vividness. Moments
of doubt were continually coming upon her, when she was uncertain
whether the train were going forwards or backwards, or were standing
still altogether; whether it were Annushka at her side or a stranger.
"What’s that on the arm of the chair, a fur cloak or some beast? And
what am I myself? Myself or some other woman?" She was afraid of giving
way to this delirium. But something drew her towards it, and she could
yield to it or resist it at will. She got up to rouse herself, and
slipped off her plaid and the cape of her warm dress. For a moment she
regained her self-possession, and realized that the thin peasant who had
come in wearing a long overcoat, with buttons missing from it, was the
stoveheater, that he was looking at the thermometer, that it was the
wind and snow bursting in after him at the door; but then everything
grew blurred again.... That peasant with the long waist seemed to be
gnawing something on the wall, the old lady began stretching her legs
the whole length of the carriage, and filling it with a black cloud;
then there was a fearful shrieking and banging, as though someone were
being torn to pieces; then there was a blinding dazzle of red fire
before her eyes and a wall seemed to rise up and hide everything. Anna
felt as though she were sinking down. But it was not terrible, but
delightful. The voice of a man muffled up and covered with snow shouted
something in her ear. She got up and pulled herself together; she
realized that they had reached a station and that this was the guard.
She asked Annushka to hand her the cape she had taken off and her shawl,
put them on and moved towards the door.

"Enough, enough!" she cried trying assiduously to give a stern
expression to her face, into which he was gazing greedily. And clutching
at the cold door post, she clambered up the steps and got rapidly into
the corridor of the carriage. But in the little corridor she paused,
going over in her imagination what had happened. Though she could not
recall her own words or his, she realized instinctively that the
momentary conversation had brought them fearfully closer; and she was
panic-stricken and blissful at it. After standing still a few seconds,
she went into the carriage and sat down in her place. The overstrained
condition which had tormented her before did not only come back, but was
intensified, and reached such a pitch that she was afraid every minute
that something would snap within her from the excessive tension. She did
not sleep all night. But in that nervous tension, and in the visions
that filled her imagination, there was nothing disagreeable or gloomy:
on the contrary there was something blissful, glowing, and exhilarating.
Towards morning Anna sank into a doze, sitting in her place, and when
she waked it was daylight and the train was near Petersburg. At once
thoughts of home, of husband and of son, and the details of that day and
the following came upon her.

Vronsky saw nothing and no one. He felt himself a king, not because he
believed that he had made an impression on Anna—he did not yet believe
that,—but because the impression she had made on him gave him happiness
and pride.

What would come of it all he did not know, he did not even think. He
felt that all his forces, hitherto dissipated, wasted, were centered on
one thing, and bent with fearful energy on one blissful goal. And he was
happy at it. He knew only that he had told her the truth, that he had
come where she was, that all the happiness of his life, the only meaning
in life for him, now lay in seeing and hearing her. And when he got out
of the carriage at Bologova to get some seltzer water, and caught sight
of Anna, involuntarily his first word had told her just what he thought.
And he was glad he had told her it, that she knew it now and was
thinking of it. He did not sleep all night. When he was back in the
carriage, he kept unceasingly going over every position in which he had
seen her, every word she had uttered, and before his fancy, making his
heart faint with emotion, floated pictures of a possible future.

At the moment when he was approaching Anna Arkadyevna he noticed too
with joy that she was conscious of his being near, and looked round, and
seeing him, turned again to her husband.

"Count Vronsky," said Anna.

By addressing his wife like this he gave Vronsky to understand that he
wished to be left alone, and, turning slightly towards him, he touched
his hat; but Vronsky turned to Anna Arkadyevna.

The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a friend of her husband’s, and the
center of that one of the coteries of the Petersburg world with which
Anna was, through her husband, in the closest relations.

The first person to meet Anna at home was her son. He dashed down the
stairs to her, in spite of the governess’s call, and with desperate joy
shrieked: "Mother! mother!" Running up to her, he hung on her neck.

And her son, like her husband, aroused in Anna a feeling akin to
disappointment. She had imagined him better than he was in reality. She
had to let herself drop down to the reality to enjoy him as he really
was. But even as he was, he was charming, with his fair curls, his blue
eyes, and his plump, graceful little legs in tightly pulled-up
stockings. Anna experienced almost physical pleasure in the sensation of
his nearness, and his caresses, and moral soothing, when she met his
simple, confiding, and loving glance, and heard his naïve questions.
Anna took out the presents Dolly’s children had sent him, and told her
son what sort of little girl was Tanya at Moscow, and how Tanya could
read, and even taught the other children.

Anna had not had time to drink her coffee when the Countess Lidia
Ivanovna was announced. The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a tall, stout
woman, with an unhealthily sallow face and splendid, pensive black eyes.
Anna liked her, but today she seemed to be seeing her for the first time
with all her defects.

"Yes, it’s all over, but it was all much less serious than we had
supposed," answered Anna. "My _belle-soeur_ is in general too hasty."

But Countess Lidia Ivanovna, though she was interested in everything
that did not concern her, had a habit of never listening to what
interested her; she interrupted Anna:

"Oh, why?" asked Anna, trying to suppress a smile.

"It was all the same before, of course; but why was it I didn’t notice
it before?" Anna asked herself. "Or has she been very much irritated
today? It’s really ludicrous; her object is doing good; she a Christian,
yet she’s always angry; and she always has enemies, and always enemies
in the name of Christianity and doing good."

After Countess Lidia Ivanovna another friend came, the wife of a chief
secretary, who told her all the news of the town. At three o’clock she
too went away, promising to come to dinner. Alexey Alexandrovitch was at
the ministry. Anna, left alone, spent the time till dinner in assisting
at her son’s dinner (he dined apart from his parents) and in putting her
things in order, and in reading and answering the notes and letters
which had accumulated on her table.

Alexey Alexandrovitch came back from the meeting of the ministers at
four o’clock, but as often happened, he had not time to come in to her.
He went into his study to see the people waiting for him with petitions,
and to sign some papers brought him by his chief secretary. At dinner
time (there were always a few people dining with the Karenins) there
arrived an old lady, a cousin of Alexey Alexandrovitch, the chief
secretary of the department and his wife, and a young man who had been
recommended to Alexey Alexandrovitch for the service. Anna went into the
drawing room to receive these guests. Precisely at five o’clock, before
the bronze Peter the First clock had struck the fifth stroke, Alexey
Alexandrovitch came in, wearing a white tie and evening coat with two
stars, as he had to go out directly after dinner. Every minute of Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s life was portioned out and occupied. And to make time
to get through all that lay before him every day, he adhered to the
strictest punctuality. "Unhasting and unresting," was his motto. He came
into the dining hall, greeted everyone, and hurriedly sat down, smiling
to his wife.

At dinner he talked a little to his wife about Moscow matters, and, with
a sarcastic smile, asked her after Stepan Arkadyevitch; but the
conversation was for the most part general, dealing with Petersburg
official and public news. After dinner he spent half an hour with his
guests, and again, with a smile, pressed his wife’s hand, withdrew, and
drove off to the council. Anna did not go out that evening either to the
Princess Betsy Tverskaya, who, hearing of her return, had invited her,
nor to the theater, where she had a box for that evening. She did not go
out principally because the dress she had reckoned upon was not ready.
Altogether, Anna, on turning, after the departure of her guests, to the
consideration of her attire, was very much annoyed. She was generally a
mistress of the art of dressing well without great expense, and before
leaving Moscow she had given her dressmaker three dresses to transform.
The dresses had to be altered so that they could not be recognized, and
they ought to have been ready three days before. It appeared that two
dresses had not been done at all, while the other one had not been
altered as Anna had intended. The dressmaker came to explain, declaring
that it would be better as she had done it, and Anna was so furious that
she felt ashamed when she thought of it afterwards. To regain her
serenity completely she went into the nursery, and spent the whole
evening with her son, put him to bed herself, signed him with the cross,
and tucked him up. She was glad she had not gone out anywhere, and had
spent the evening so well. She felt so light-hearted and serene, she saw
so clearly that all that had seemed to her so important on her railway
journey was only one of the common trivial incidents of fashionable
life, and that she had no reason to feel ashamed before anyone else or
before herself. Anna sat down at the hearth with an English novel and
waited for her husband. Exactly at half-past nine she heard his ring,
and he came into the room.

Anna smiled. She knew that he said that simply to show that family
considerations could not prevent him from expressing his genuine
opinion. She knew that characteristic in her husband, and liked it.

Anna had heard nothing of this act, and she felt conscience-stricken at
having been able so readily to forget what was to him of such
importance.

Anna smiled, as people smile at the weaknesses of those they love, and,
putting her hand under his, she escorted him to the door of the study.
She knew his habit, that had grown into a necessity, of reading in the
evening. She knew, too, that in spite of his official duties, which
swallowed up almost the whole of his time, he considered it his duty to
keep up with everything of note that appeared in the intellectual world.
She knew, too, that he was really interested in books dealing with
politics, philosophy, and theology, that art was utterly foreign to his
nature; but, in spite of this, or rather, in consequence of it, Alexey
Alexandrovitch never passed over anything in the world of art, but made
it his duty to read everything. She knew that in politics, in
philosophy, in theology, Alexey Alexandrovitch often had doubts, and
made investigations; but on questions of art and poetry, and, above all,
of music, of which he was totally devoid of understanding, he had the
most distinct and decided opinions. He was fond of talking about
Shakespeare, Raphael, Beethoven, of the significance of new schools of
poetry and music, all of which were classified by him with very
conspicuous consistency.

"All the same he’s a good man; truthful, good-hearted, and remarkable in
his own line," Anna said to herself going back to her room, as though
she were defending him to someone who had attacked him and said that one
could not love him. "But why is it his ears stick out so strangely? Or
has he had his hair cut?"

Precisely at twelve o’clock, when Anna was still sitting at her writing
table, finishing a letter to Dolly, she heard the sound of measured
steps in slippers, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, freshly washed and combed,
with a book under his arm, came in to her.

"And what right had he to look at him like that?" thought Anna,
recalling Vronsky’s glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch.

Dolly could not help sighing. Her dearest friend, her sister, was going
away. And her life was not a cheerful one. Her relations with Stepan
Arkadyevitch after their reconciliation had become humiliating. The
union Anna had cemented turned out to be of no solid character, and
family harmony was breaking down again at the same point. There had been
nothing definite, but Stepan Arkadyevitch was hardly ever at home;
money, too, was hardly ever forthcoming, and Dolly was continually
tortured by suspicions of infidelity, which she tried to dismiss,
dreading the agonies of jealousy she had been through already. The first
onslaught of jealousy, once lived through, could never come back again,
and even the discovery of infidelities could never now affect her as it
had the first time. Such a discovery now would only mean breaking up
family habits, and she let herself be deceived, despising him and still
more herself, for the weakness. Besides this, the care of her large
family was a constant worry to her: first, the nursing of her young baby
did not go well, then the nurse had gone away, now one of the children
had fallen ill.

The highest Petersburg society is essentially one: in it everyone knows
everyone else, everyone even visits everyone else. But this great set
has its subdivisions. Anna Arkadyevna Karenina had friends and close
ties in three different circles of this highest society. One circle was
her husband’s government official set, consisting of his colleagues and
subordinates, brought together in the most various and capricious
manner, and belonging to different social strata. Anna found it
difficult now to recall the feeling of almost awe-stricken reverence
which she had at first entertained for these persons. Now she knew all
of them as people know one another in a country town; she knew their
habits and weaknesses, and where the shoe pinched each one of them. She
knew their relations with one another and with the head authorities,
knew who was for whom, and how each one maintained his position, and
where they agreed and disagreed. But the circle of political, masculine
interests had never interested her, in spite of countess Lidia
Ivanovna’s influence, and she avoided it.

Another little set with which Anna was in close relations was the one by
means of which Alexey Alexandrovitch had made his career. The center of
this circle was the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. It was a set made up of
elderly, ugly, benevolent, and godly women, and clever, learned, and
ambitious men. One of the clever people belonging to the set had called
it "the conscience of Petersburg society." Alexey Alexandrovitch had the
highest esteem for this circle, and Anna with her special gift for
getting on with everyone, had in the early days of her life in
Petersburg made friends in this circle also. Now, since her return from
Moscow, she had come to feel this set insufferable. It seemed to her
that both she and all of them were insincere, and she felt so bored and
ill at ease in that world that she went to see the Countess Lidia
Ivanovna as little as possible.

The third circle with which Anna had ties was preeminently the
fashionable world—the world of balls, of dinners, of sumptuous dresses,
the world that hung on to the court with one hand, so as to avoid
sinking to the level of the demi-monde. For the demi-monde the members
of that fashionable world believed that they despised, though their
tastes were not merely similar, but in fact identical. Her connection
with this circle was kept up through Princess Betsy Tverskaya, her
cousin’s wife, who had an income of a hundred and twenty thousand
roubles, and who had taken a great fancy to Anna ever since she first
came out, showed her much attention, and drew her into her set, making
fun of Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s coterie.

Anna had at first avoided as far as she could Princess Tverskaya’s
world, because it necessitated an expenditure beyond her means, and
besides in her heart she preferred the first circle. But since her visit
to Moscow she had done quite the contrary. She avoided her
serious-minded friends, and went out into the fashionable world. There
she met Vronsky, and experienced an agitating joy at those meetings. She
met Vronsky specially often at Betsy’s for Betsy was a Vronsky by birth
and his cousin. Vronsky was everywhere where he had any chance of
meeting Anna, and speaking to her, when he could, of his love. She gave
him no encouragement, but every time she met him there surged up in her
heart that same feeling of quickened life that had come upon her that
day in the railway carriage when she saw him for the first time. She was
conscious herself that her delight sparkled in her eyes and curved her
lips into a smile, and she could not quench the expression of this
delight.

At first Anna sincerely believed that she was displeased with him for
daring to pursue her. Soon after her return from Moscow, on arriving at
a _soirée_ where she had expected to meet him, and not finding him
there, she realized distinctly from the rush of disappointment that she
had been deceiving herself, and that this pursuit was not merely not
distasteful to her, but that it made the whole interest of her life.

"Anna is quite changed since her stay in Moscow. There’s something
strange about her," said her friend.

"Yes, but women with a shadow usually come to a bad end," said Anna’s
friend.

"That’s just it, just it," Princess Myakaya turned to him. "But the
point is that I won’t abandon Anna to your mercies. She’s so nice, so
charming. How can she help it if they’re all in love with her, and
follow her about like shadows?"

"Oh, I had no idea of blaming her for it," Anna’s friend said in
self-defense.

And having duly disposed of Anna’s friend, the Princess Myakaya got up,
and together with the ambassador’s wife, joined the group at the table,
where the conversation was dealing with the king of Prussia.

Steps were heard at the door, and Princess Betsy, knowing it was Madame
Karenina, glanced at Vronsky. He was looking towards the door, and his
face wore a strange new expression. Joyfully, intently, and at the same
time timidly, he gazed at the approaching figure, and slowly he rose to
his feet. Anna walked into the drawing room. Holding herself extremely
erect, as always, looking straight before her, and moving with her
swift, resolute, and light step, that distinguished her from all other
society women, she crossed the short space to her hostess, shook hands
with her, smiled, and with the same smile looked around at Vronsky.
Vronsky bowed low and pushed a chair up for her.

"Just so," Betsy agreed; "one must make mistakes and correct them. What
do you think about it?" she turned to Anna, who, with a faintly
perceptible resolute smile on her lips, was listening in silence to the
conversation.

"I think," said Anna, playing with the glove she had taken off, "I think
... of so many men, so many minds, certainly so many hearts, so many
kinds of love."

Vronsky was gazing at Anna, and with a fainting heart waiting for what
she would say. He sighed as after a danger escaped when she uttered
these words.

Anna suddenly turned to him.

Anna looked sternly at him.

Anna got up and went to Betsy.

While Betsy was pouring out the tea, Vronsky went up to Anna.

"I often think men have no understanding of what’s not honorable though
they’re always talking of it," said Anna, without answering him. "I’ve
wanted to tell you so a long while," she added, and moving a few steps
away, she sat down at a table in a corner covered with albums.

"Remember that I have forbidden you to utter that word, that hateful
word," said Anna, with a shudder. But at once she felt that by that very
word "forbidden" she had shown that she acknowledged certain rights over
him, and by that very fact was encouraging him to speak of love. "I have
long meant to tell you this," she went on, looking resolutely into his
eyes, and hot all over from the burning flush on her cheeks. "I’ve come
on purpose this evening, knowing I should meet you. I have come to tell
you that this must end. I have never blushed before anyone, and you
force me to feel to blame for something."

Vronsky and Anna still sat at the little table.

"What did I tell you?" said Anna’s friend.

Noticing the disagreeable impression that was being made on everyone,
Princess Betsy slipped someone else into her place to listen to Alexey
Alexandrovitch, and went up to Anna.

"Oh, yes!" said Anna, radiant with a smile of happiness, and not
understanding a word of what Betsy had said. She crossed over to the big
table and took part in the general conversation.

The fat old Tatar, Madame Karenina’s coachman, was with difficulty
holding one of her pair of grays, chilled with the cold and rearing at
the entrance. A footman stood opening the carriage door. The hall porter
stood holding open the great door of the house. Anna Arkadyevna, with
her quick little hand, was unfastening the lace of her sleeve, caught in
the hook of her fur cloak, and with bent head listening to the words
Vronsky murmured as he escorted her down.

On reaching home Alexey Alexandrovitch went to his study, as he usually
did, seated himself in his low chair, opened a book on the Papacy at the
place where he had laid the paper-knife in it, and read till one
o’clock, just as he usually did. But from time to time he rubbed his
high forehead and shook his head, as though to drive away something. At
his usual time he got up and made his toilet for the night. Anna
Arkadyevna had not yet come in. With a book under his arm he went
upstairs. But this evening, instead of his usual thoughts and
meditations upon official details, his thoughts were absorbed by his
wife and something disagreeable connected with her. Contrary to his
usual habit, he did not get into bed, but fell to walking up and down
the rooms with his hands clasped behind his back. He could not go to
bed, feeling that it was absolutely needful for him first to think
thoroughly over the position that had just arisen.

Anna came in with hanging head, playing with the tassels of her hood.
Her face was brilliant and glowing; but this glow was not one of
brightness; it suggested the fearful glow of a conflagration in the
midst of a dark night. On seeing her husband, Anna raised her head and
smiled, as though she had just waked up.

"Anna, it’s necessary for me to have a talk with you."

Anna said what came to her lips, and marveled, hearing herself, at her
own capacity for lying. How simple and natural were her words, and how
likely that she was simply sleepy! She felt herself clad in an
impenetrable armor of falsehood. She felt that some unseen force had
come to her aid and was supporting her.

"Anna, I must warn you," he began.

"Anna, is this you?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, quietly making an
effort over himself, and restraining the motion of his fingers.

"I positively don’t understand," said Anna, shrugging her shoulders—"He
doesn’t care," she thought. "But other people noticed it, and that’s
what upsets him."—"You’re not well, Alexey Alexandrovitch," she added,
and she got up, and would have gone towards the door; but he moved
forward as though he would stop her.

His face was ugly and forbidding, as Anna had never seen him. She
stopped, and bending her head back and on one side, began with her rapid
hand taking out her hairpins.

"Anna, for God’s sake don’t speak like that!" he said gently. "Perhaps I
am mistaken, but believe me, what I say, I say as much for myself as for
you. I am your husband, and I love you."

When she came into the bedroom, he was already in bed. His lips were
sternly compressed, and his eyes looked away from her. Anna got into her
bed, and lay expecting every minute that he would begin to speak to her
again. She both feared his speaking and wished for it. But he was
silent. She waited for a long while without moving, and had forgotten
about him. She thought of that other; she pictured him, and felt how her
heart was flooded with emotion and guilty delight at the thought of him.
Suddenly she heard an even, tranquil snore. For the first instant Alexey
Alexandrovitch seemed, as it were, appalled at his own snoring, and
ceased; but after an interval of two breathings the snore sounded again,
with a new tranquil rhythm.

From that time a new life began for Alexey Alexandrovitch and for his
wife. Nothing special happened. Anna went out into society, as she had
always done, was particularly often at Princess Betsy’s, and met Vronsky
everywhere. Alexey Alexandrovitch saw this, but could do nothing. All
his efforts to draw her into open discussion she confronted with a
barrier which he could not penetrate, made up of a sort of amused
perplexity. Outwardly everything was the same, but their inner relations
were completely changed. Alexey Alexandrovitch, a man of great power in
the world of politics, felt himself helpless in this. Like an ox with
head bent, submissively he awaited the blow which he felt was lifted
over him. Every time he began to think about it, he felt that he must
try once more, that by kindness, tenderness, and persuasion there was
still hope of saving her, of bringing her back to herself, and every day
he made ready to talk to her. But every time he began talking to her, he
felt that the spirit of evil and deceit, which had taken possession of
her, had possession of him too, and he talked to her in a tone quite
unlike that in which he had meant to talk. Involuntarily he talked to
her in his habitual tone of jeering at anyone who should say what he was
saying. And in that tone it was impossible to say what needed to be said
to her.

That which for Vronsky had been almost a whole year the one absorbing
desire of his life, replacing all his old desires; that which for Anna
had been an impossible, terrible, and even for that reason more
entrancing dream of bliss, that desire had been fulfilled. He stood
before her, pale, his lower jaw quivering, and besought her to be calm,
not knowing how or why.

"Anna! Anna!" he said with a choking voice, "Anna, for pity’s sake!..."

The greater number of the young women, who envied Anna and had long been
weary of hearing her called _virtuous_, rejoiced at the fulfillment of
their predictions, and were only waiting for a decisive turn in public
opinion to fall upon her with all the weight of their scorn. They were
already making ready their handfuls of mud to fling at her when the
right moment arrived. The greater number of the middle-aged people and
certain great personages were displeased at the prospect of the
impending scandal in society.

He was thinking of Anna’s promise to see him that day after the races.
But he had not seen her for three days, and as her husband had just
returned from abroad, he did not know whether she would be able to meet
him today or not, and he did not know how to find out. He had had his
last interview with her at his cousin Betsy’s summer villa. He visited
the Karenins’ summer villa as rarely as possible. Now he wanted to go
there, and he pondered the question how to do it.

Yes, it was the same thing over and over again. Everyone, his mother,
his brother, everyone thought fit to interfere in the affairs of his
heart. This interference aroused in him a feeling of angry hatred—a
feeling he had rarely known before. "What business is it of theirs? Why
does everybody feel called upon to concern himself about me? And why do
they worry me so? Just because they see that this is something they
can’t understand. If it were a common, vulgar, worldly intrigue, they
would have left me alone. They feel that this is something different,
that this is not a mere pastime, that this woman is dearer to me than
life. And this is incomprehensible, and that’s why it annoys them.
Whatever our destiny is or may be, we have made it ourselves, and we do
not complain of it," he said, in the word _we_ linking himself with
Anna. "No, they must needs teach us how to live. They haven’t an idea of
what happiness is; they don’t know that without our love, for us there
is neither happiness nor unhappiness—no life at all," he thought.

He was angry with all of them for their interference just because he
felt in his soul that they, all these people, were right. He felt that
the love that bound him to Anna was not a momentary impulse, which would
pass, as worldly intrigues do pass, leaving no other traces in the life
of either but pleasant or unpleasant memories. He felt all the torture
of his own and her position, all the difficulty there was for them,
conspicuous as they were in the eye of all the world, in concealing
their love, in lying and deceiving; and in lying, deceiving, feigning,
and continually thinking of others, when the passion that united them
was so intense that they were both oblivious of everything else but
their love.

He vividly recalled all the constantly recurring instances of inevitable
necessity for lying and deceit, which were so against his natural bent.
He recalled particularly vividly the shame he had more than once
detected in her at this necessity for lying and deceit. And he
experienced the strange feeling that had sometimes come upon him since
his secret love for Anna. This was a feeling of loathing for
something—whether for Alexey Alexandrovitch, or for himself, or for the
whole world, he could not have said. But he always drove away this
strange feeling. Now, too, he shook it off and continued the thread of
his thoughts.

This boy was more often than anyone else a check upon their freedom.
When he was present, both Vronsky and Anna did not merely avoid speaking
of anything that they could not have repeated before everyone; they did
not even allow themselves to refer by hints to anything the boy did not
understand. They had made no agreement about this, it had settled
itself. They would have felt it wounding themselves to deceive the
child. In his presence they talked like acquaintances. But in spite of
this caution, Vronsky often saw the child’s intent, bewildered glance
fixed upon him, and a strange shyness, uncertainty, at one time
friendliness, at another, coldness and reserve, in the boy’s manner to
him; as though the child felt that between this man and his mother there
existed some important bond, the significance of which he could not
understand.

"What does it mean? Who is he? How ought I to love him? If I don’t know,
it’s my fault; either I’m stupid or a naughty boy," thought the child.
And this was what caused his dubious, inquiring, sometimes hostile,
expression, and the shyness and uncertainty which Vronsky found so
irksome. This child’s presence always and infallibly called up in
Vronsky that strange feeling of inexplicable loathing which he had
experienced of late. This child’s presence called up both in Vronsky and
in Anna a feeling akin to the feeling of a sailor who sees by the
compass that the direction in which he is swiftly moving is far from the
right one, but that to arrest his motion is not in his power, that every
instant is carrying him further and further away, and that to admit to
himself his deviation from the right direction is the same as admitting
his certain ruin.

Vronsky had several times already, though not so resolutely as now,
tried to bring her to consider their position, and every time he had
been confronted by the same superficiality and triviality with which she
met his appeal now. It was as though there were something in this which
she could not or would not face, as though directly she began to speak
of this, she, the real Anna, retreated somehow into herself, and another
strange and unaccountable woman came out, whom he did not love, and whom
he feared, and who was in opposition to him. But today he was resolved
to have it out.

"But, Anna," said Vronsky, in a soft and persuasive voice, trying to
soothe her, "we absolutely must, anyway, tell him, and then be guided by
the line he takes."

"Anna," he said, with reproachful tenderness.

"But, Anna..."

When Vronsky looked at his watch on the Karenins’ balcony, he was so
greatly agitated and lost in his thoughts that he saw the figures on the
watch’s face, but could not take in what time it was. He came out on to
the high road and walked, picking his way carefully through the mud, to
his carriage. He was so completely absorbed in his feeling for Anna,
that he did not even think what o’clock it was, and whether he had time
to go to Bryansky’s. He had left him, as often happens, only the
external faculty of memory, that points out each step one has to take,
one after the other. He went up to his coachman, who was dozing on the
box in the shadow, already lengthening, of a thick limetree; he admired
the shifting clouds of midges circling over the hot horses, and, waking
the coachman, he jumped into the carriage, and told him to drive to
Bryansky’s. It was only after driving nearly five miles that he had
sufficiently recovered himself to look at his watch, and realize that it
was half-past five, and he was late.

He reached Bryansky’s, spent five minutes there, and galloped back. This
rapid drive calmed him. All that was painful in his relations with Anna,
all the feeling of indefiniteness left by their conversation, had
slipped out of his mind. He was thinking now with pleasure and
excitement of the race, of his being anyhow, in time, and now and then
the thought of the blissful interview awaiting him that night flashed
across his imagination like a flaming light.

The external relations of Alexey Alexandrovitch and his wife had
remained unchanged. The sole difference lay in the fact that he was more
busily occupied than ever. As in former years, at the beginning of the
spring he had gone to a foreign watering-place for the sake of his
health, deranged by the winter’s work that every year grew heavier. And
just as always he returned in July and at once fell to work as usual
with increased energy. As usual, too, his wife had moved for the summer
to a villa out of town, while he remained in Petersburg. From the date
of their conversation after the party at Princess Tverskaya’s he had
never spoken again to Anna of his suspicions and his jealousies, and
that habitual tone of his bantering mimicry was the most convenient tone
possible for his present attitude to his wife. He was a little colder to
his wife. He simply seemed to be slightly displeased with her for that
first midnight conversation, which she had repelled. In his attitude to
her there was a shade of vexation, but nothing more. "You would not be
open with me," he seemed to say, mentally addressing her; "so much the
worse for you. Now you may beg as you please, but I won’t be open with
you. So much the worse for you!" he said mentally, like a man who, after
vainly attempting to extinguish a fire, should fly in a rage with his
vain efforts and say, "Oh, very well then! you shall burn for this!"
This man, so subtle and astute in official life, did not realize all the
senselessness of such an attitude to his wife. He did not realize it,
because it was too terrible to him to realize his actual position, and
he shut down and locked and sealed up in his heart that secret place
where lay hid his feelings towards his family, that is, his wife and
son. He who had been such a careful father, had from the end of that
winter become peculiarly frigid to his son, and adopted to him just the
same bantering tone he used with his wife. "Aha, young man!" was the
greeting with which he met him.

Alexey Alexandrovitch’s permanent summer villa was in Peterhof, and the
Countess Lidia Ivanovna used as a rule to spend the summer there, close
to Anna, and constantly seeing her. That year Countess Lidia Ivanovna
declined to settle in Peterhof, was not once at Anna Arkadyevna’s, and
in conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch hinted at the unsuitability
of Anna’s close intimacy with Betsy and Vronsky. Alexey Alexandrovitch
sternly cut her short, roundly declaring his wife to be above suspicion,
and from that time began to avoid Countess Lidia Ivanovna. He did not
want to see, and did not see, that many people in society cast dubious
glances on his wife; he did not want to understand, and did not
understand, why his wife had so particularly insisted on staying at
Tsarskoe, where Betsy was staying, and not far from the camp of
Vronsky’s regiment. He did not allow himself to think about it, and he
did not think about it; but all the same though he never admitted it to
himself, and had no proofs, not even suspicious evidence, in the bottom
of his heart he knew beyond all doubt that he was a deceived husband,
and he was profoundly miserable about it.

Anna was upstairs, standing before the looking glass, and, with
Annushka’s assistance, pinning the last ribbon on her gown when she
heard carriage wheels crunching the gravel at the entrance.

"There’s no hurry," said Anna. "Would you like tea?"

All this she said brightly, rapidly, and with a peculiar brilliance in
her eyes. But Alexey Alexandrovitch did not now attach any special
significance to this tone of hers. He heard only her words and gave them
only the direct sense they bore. And he answered simply, though
jestingly. There was nothing remarkable in all this conversation, but
never after could Anna recall this brief scene without an agonizing pang
of shame.

And he gave his hand to the scared child. Seryozha had been shy of his
father before, and now, ever since Alexey Alexandrovitch had taken to
calling him young man, and since that insoluble question had occurred to
him whether Vronsky were a friend or a foe, he avoided his father. He
looked round towards his mother as though seeking shelter. It was only
with his mother that he was at ease. Meanwhile, Alexey Alexandrovitch
was holding his son by the shoulder while he was speaking to the
governess, and Seryozha was so miserably uncomfortable that Anna saw he
was on the point of tears.

Anna, who had flushed a little the instant her son came in, noticing
that Seryozha was uncomfortable, got up hurriedly, took Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s hand from her son’s shoulder, and kissing the boy, led
him out onto the terrace, and quickly came back.

"I’m going; good-bye!" said Anna, and kissing her son, she went up to
Alexey Alexandrovitch and held out her hand to him. "It was ever so nice
of you to come."

When Alexey Alexandrovitch reached the race-course, Anna was already
sitting in the pavilion beside Betsy, in that pavilion where all the
highest society had gathered. She caught sight of her husband in the
distance. Two men, her husband and her lover, were the two centers of
her existence, and unaided by her external senses she was aware of their
nearness. She was aware of her husband approaching a long way off, and
she could not help following him in the surging crowd in the midst of
which he was moving. She watched his progress towards the pavilion, saw
him now responding condescendingly to an ingratiating bow, now
exchanging friendly, nonchalant greetings with his equals, now
assiduously trying to catch the eye of some great one of this world, and
taking off his big round hat that squeezed the tips of his ears. All
these ways of his she knew, and all were hateful to her. "Nothing but
ambition, nothing but the desire to get on, that’s all there is in his
soul," she thought; "as for these lofty ideals, love of culture,
religion, they are only so many tools for getting on."

There was an interval between the races, and so nothing hindered
conversation. The adjutant-general expressed his disapproval of races.
Alexey Alexandrovitch replied defending them. Anna heard his high,
measured tones, not losing one word, and every word struck her as false,
and stabbed her ears with pain.

"I’m a wicked woman, a lost woman," she thought; "but I don’t like
lying, I can’t endure falsehood, while as for _him_ (her husband) it’s
the breath of his life—falsehood. He knows all about it, he sees it all;
what does he care if he can talk so calmly? If he were to kill me, if he
were to kill Vronsky, I might respect him. No, all he wants is falsehood
and propriety," Anna said to herself, not considering exactly what it
was she wanted of her husband, and how she would have liked to see him
behave. She did not understand either that Alexey Alexandrovitch’s
peculiar loquacity that day, so exasperating to her, was merely the
expression of his inward distress and uneasiness. As a child that has
been hurt skips about, putting all his muscles into movement to drown
the pain, in the same way Alexey Alexandrovitch needed mental exercise
to drown the thoughts of his wife that in her presence and in Vronsky’s,
and with the continual iteration of his name, would force themselves on
his attention. And it was as natural for him to talk well and cleverly,
as it is natural for a child to skip about. He was saying:

"No, I shan’t come another time; it’s too upsetting," said Princess
Betsy. "Isn’t it, Anna?"

Anna said nothing, and keeping her opera glass up, gazed always at the
same spot.

"Anna and I are for Kuzovlev," replied Betsy.

But at that moment the racers started, and all conversation ceased.
Alexey Alexandrovitch too was silent, and everyone stood up and turned
towards the stream. Alexey Alexandrovitch took no interest in the race,
and so he did not watch the racers, but fell listlessly to scanning the
spectators with his weary eyes. His eyes rested upon Anna.

The first fall—Kuzovlev’s, at the stream—agitated everyone, but Alexey
Alexandrovitch saw distinctly on Anna’s pale, triumphant face that the
man she was watching had not fallen. When, after Mahotin and Vronsky had
cleared the worst barrier, the next officer had been thrown straight on
his head at it and fatally injured, and a shudder of horror passed over
the whole public, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that Anna did not even
notice it, and had some difficulty in realizing what they were talking
of about her. But more and more often, and with greater persistence, he
watched her. Anna, wholly engrossed as she was with the race, became
aware of her husband’s cold eyes fixed upon her from one side.

Everyone was loudly expressing disapprobation, everyone was repeating a
phrase some one had uttered—"The lions and gladiators will be the next
thing," and everyone was feeling horrified; so that when Vronsky fell to
the ground, and Anna moaned aloud, there was nothing very out of the way
in it. But afterwards a change came over Anna’s face which really was
beyond decorum. She utterly lost her head. She began fluttering like a
caged bird, at one moment would have got up and moved away, at the next
turned to Betsy.

Alexey Alexandrovitch went up to Anna and courteously offered her his
arm.

"Let us go, if you like," he said in French, but Anna was listening to
the general and did not notice her husband.

Without answering her husband, Anna lifted her opera glass and gazed
towards the place where Vronsky had fallen; but it was so far off, and
there was such a crowd of people about it, that she could make out
nothing. She laid down the opera glass, and would have moved away, but
at that moment an officer galloped up and made some announcement to the
Tsar. Anna craned forward, listening.

On hearing this Anna sat down hurriedly, and hid her face in her fan.
Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that she was weeping, and could not control
her tears, nor even the sobs that were shaking her bosom. Alexey
Alexandrovitch stood so as to screen her, giving her time to recover
herself.

"For the third time I offer you my arm," he said to her after a little
time, turning to her. Anna gazed at him and did not know what to say.
Princess Betsy came to her rescue.

"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch; I brought Anna and I promised to take her
home," put in Betsy.

"Excuse me, princess," he said, smiling courteously but looking her very
firmly in the face, "but I see that Anna’s not very well, and I wish her
to come home with me."

Anna looked about her in a frightened way, got up submissively, and laid
her hand on her husband’s arm.

As they left the pavilion, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as always, talked to
those he met, and Anna had, as always, to talk and answer; but she was
utterly beside herself, and moved hanging on her husband’s arm as though
in a dream.

"Eh? I don’t understand," said Anna contemptuously.

He got out first and helped her to get out. Before the servants he
pressed her hand, took his seat in the carriage, and drove back to
Petersburg. Immediately afterwards a footman came from Princess Betsy
and brought Anna a note.

"How is it Anna Pavlovna’s not been to see us for so long?" the princess
said one day of Madame Petrova. "I’ve asked her, but she seems put out
about something."

That day Varenka came to dinner and told them that Anna Pavlovna had
changed her mind and given up the expedition for the morrow. And the
princess noticed again that Kitty reddened.

Kitty answered that nothing had happened between them, and that she
could not tell why Anna Pavlovna seemed displeased with her. Kitty
answered perfectly truly. She did not know the reason Anna Pavlovna had
changed to her, but she guessed it. She guessed at something which she
could not tell her mother, which she did not put into words to herself.
It was one of those things which one knows but which one can never speak
of even to oneself, so terrible and shameful would it be to be mistaken.

Again and again she went over in her memory all her relations with the
family. She remembered the simple delight expressed on the round,
good-humored face of Anna Pavlovna at their meetings; she remembered
their secret confabulations about the invalid, their plots to draw him
away from the work which was forbidden him, and to get him out-of-doors;
the devotion of the youngest boy, who used to call her "my Kitty," and
would not go to bed without her. How nice it all was! Then she recalled
the thin, terribly thin figure of Petrov, with his long neck, in his
brown coat, his scant, curly hair, his questioning blue eyes that were
so terrible to Kitty at first, and his painful attempts to seem hearty
and lively in her presence. She recalled the efforts she had made at
first to overcome the repugnance she felt for him, as for all
consumptive people, and the pains it had cost her to think of things to
say to him. She recalled the timid, softened look with which he gazed at
her, and the strange feeling of compassion and awkwardness, and later of
a sense of her own goodness, which she had felt at it. How nice it all
was! But all that was at first. Now, a few days ago, everything was
suddenly spoiled. Anna Pavlovna had met Kitty with affected cordiality,
and had kept continual watch on her and on her husband.

Could that touching pleasure he showed when she came near be the cause
of Anna Pavlovna’s coolness?

"Yes," she mused, "there was something unnatural about Anna Pavlovna,
and utterly unlike her good nature, when she said angrily the day before
yesterday: ‘There, he will keep waiting for you; he wouldn’t drink his
coffee without you, though he’s grown so dreadfully weak.’"

"That’s Petrov, an artist," answered Kitty, blushing. "And that’s his
wife," she added, indicating Anna Pavlovna, who, as though on purpose,
at the very instant they approached walked away after a child that had
run off along a path.

"I meant to come, but Varenka said that Anna Pavlovna sent word you were
not going."

Anna Pavlovna came up.

"Good morning, princess," said Anna Pavlovna, with an assumed smile
utterly unlike her former manner. "Very glad to make your acquaintance,"
she said to the prince. "You’ve long been expected, prince."

"Yes, papa," answered Kitty. "And you must know they’ve three children,
no servant, and scarcely any means. He gets something from the Academy,"
she went on briskly, trying to drown the distress that the queer change
in Anna Pavlovna’s manner to her had aroused in her.

"Well, and for some reason Anna Pavlovna told him that he didn’t want to
go because you are here. Of course, that was nonsense; but there was a
dispute over it—over you. You know how irritable these sick people are."

"I don’t talk about you, not about you at all. You’re perfection. Yes,
yes, I know you’re all perfection; but what am I to do if I’m bad? This
would never have been if I weren’t bad. So let me be what I am. I won’t
be a sham. What have I to do with Anna Pavlovna? Let them go their way,
and me go mine. I can’t be different.... And yet it’s not that, it’s not
that."

When returning from the races Anna had informed him of her relations
with Vronsky, and immediately afterwards had burst into tears, hiding
her face in her hands, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for all the fury aroused
in him against her, was aware at the same time of a rush of that
emotional disturbance always produced in him by tears. Conscious of it,
and conscious that any expression of his feelings at that minute would
be out of keeping with the position, he tried to suppress every
manifestation of life in himself, and so neither stirred nor looked at
her. This was what had caused that strange expression of deathlike
rigidity in his face which had so impressed Anna.

"Give this to the courier to be delivered to Anna Arkadyevna tomorrow at
the summer villa," he said, getting up.

Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be brought to the study, and
playing with the massive paper-knife, he moved to his easy chair, near
which there had been placed ready for him a lamp and the French work on
Egyptian hieroglyphics that he had begun. Over the easy chair there hung
in a gold frame an oval portrait of Anna, a fine painting by a
celebrated artist. Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at it. The unfathomable
eyes gazed ironically and insolently at him. Insufferably insolent and
challenging was the effect in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes of the black
lace about the head, admirably touched in by the painter, the black hair
and handsome white hand with one finger lifted, covered with rings.
After looking at the portrait for a minute, Alexey Alexandrovitch
shuddered so that his lips quivered and he uttered the sound "brrr," and
turned away. He made haste to sit down in his easy chair and opened the
book. He tried to read, but he could not revive the very vivid interest
he had felt before in Egyptian hieroglyphics. He looked at the book and
thought of something else. He thought not of his wife, but of a
complication that had arisen in his official life, which at the time
constituted the chief interest of it. He felt that he had penetrated
more deeply than ever before into this intricate affair, and that he had
originated a leading idea—he could say it without
self-flattery—calculated to clear up the whole business, to strengthen
him in his official career, to discomfit his enemies, and thereby to be
of the greatest benefit to the government. Directly the servant had set
the tea and left the room, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up and went to the
writing-table. Moving into the middle of the table a portfolio of
papers, with a scarcely perceptible smile of self-satisfaction, he took
a pencil from a rack and plunged into the perusal of a complex report
relating to the present complication. The complication was of this
nature: Alexey Alexandrovitch’s characteristic quality as a politician,
that special individual qualification that every rising functionary
possesses, the qualification that with his unflagging ambition, his
reserve, his honesty, and with his self-confidence had made his career,
was his contempt for red tape, his cutting down of correspondence, his
direct contact, wherever possible, with the living fact, and his
economy. It happened that the famous Commission of the 2nd of June had
set on foot an inquiry into the irrigation of lands in the Zaraisky
province, which fell under Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department, and was a
glaring example of fruitless expenditure and paper reforms. Alexey
Alexandrovitch was aware of the truth of this. The irrigation of these
lands in the Zaraisky province had been initiated by the predecessor of
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s predecessor. And vast sums of money had actually
been spent and were still being spent on this business, and utterly
unproductively, and the whole business could obviously lead to nothing
whatever. Alexey Alexandrovitch had perceived this at once on entering
office, and would have liked to lay hands on the Board of Irrigation.
But at first, when he did not yet feel secure in his position, he knew
it would affect too many interests, and would be injudicious. Later on
he had been engrossed in other questions, and had simply forgotten the
Board of Irrigation. It went of itself, like all such boards, by the
mere force of inertia. (Many people gained their livelihood by the Board
of Irrigation, especially one highly conscientious and musical family:
all the daughters played on stringed instruments, and Alexey
Alexandrovitch knew the family and had stood godfather to one of the
elder daughters.) The raising of this question by a hostile department
was in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s opinion a dishonorable proceeding, seeing
that in every department there were things similar and worse, which no
one inquired into, for well-known reasons of official etiquette.
However, now that the glove had been thrown down to him, he had boldly
picked it up and demanded the appointment of a special commission to
investigate and verify the working of the Board of Irrigation of the
lands in the Zaraisky province. But in compensation he gave no quarter
to the enemy either. He demanded the appointment of another special
commission to inquire into the question of the Native Tribes
Organization Committee. The question of the Native Tribes had been
brought up incidentally in the Commission of the 2nd of June, and had
been pressed forward actively by Alexey Alexandrovitch as one admitting
of no delay on account of the deplorable condition of the native tribes.
In the commission this question had been a ground of contention between
several departments. The department hostile to Alexey Alexandrovitch
proved that the condition of the native tribes was exceedingly
flourishing, that the proposed reconstruction might be the ruin of their
prosperity, and that if there were anything wrong, it arose mainly from
the failure on the part of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department to carry
out the measures prescribed by law. Now Alexey Alexandrovitch intended
to demand: First, that a new commission should be formed which should be
empowered to investigate the condition of the native tribes on the spot;
secondly, if it should appear that the condition of the native tribes
actually was such as it appeared to be from the official documents in
the hands of the committee, that another new scientific commission
should be appointed to investigate the deplorable condition of the
native tribes from the—(1) political, (2) administrative, (3) economic,
(4) ethnographical, (5) material, and (6) religious points of view;
thirdly, that evidence should be required from the rival department of
the measures that had been taken during the last ten years by that
department for averting the disastrous conditions in which the native
tribes were now placed; and fourthly and finally, that that department
explain why it had, as appeared from the evidence before the committee,
from No. 17,015 and 18,038, from December 5, 1863, and June 7, 1864,
acted in direct contravention of the intent of the law T... Act 18, and
the note to Act 36. A flash of eagerness suffused the face of Alexey
Alexandrovitch as he rapidly wrote out a synopsis of these ideas for his
own benefit. Having filled a sheet of paper, he got up, rang, and sent a
note to the chief secretary of his department to look up certain
necessary facts for him. Getting up and walking about the room, he
glanced again at the portrait, frowned, and smiled contemptuously. After
reading a little more of the book on Egyptian hieroglyphics, and
renewing his interest in it, Alexey Alexandrovitch went to bed at eleven
o’clock, and recollecting as he lay in bed the incident with his wife,
he saw it now in by no means such a gloomy light.

Though Anna had obstinately and with exasperation contradicted Vronsky
when he told her their position was impossible, at the bottom of her
heart she regarded her own position as false and dishonorable, and she
longed with her whole soul to change it. On the way home from the races
she had told her husband the truth in a moment of excitement, and in
spite of the agony she had suffered in doing so, she was glad of it.
After her husband had left her, she told herself that she was glad, that
now everything was made clear, and at least there would be no more lying
and deception. It seemed to her beyond doubt that her position was now
made clear forever. It might be bad, this new position, but it would be
clear; there would be no indefiniteness or falsehood about it. The pain
she had caused herself and her husband in uttering those words would be
rewarded now by everything being made clear, she thought. That evening
she saw Vronsky, but she did not tell him of what had passed between her
and her husband, though, to make the position definite, it was necessary
to tell him.

The maid, who had been listening at her door for a long while, came into
her room of her own accord. Anna glanced inquiringly into her face, and
blushed with a scared look. The maid begged her pardon for coming in,
saying that she had fancied the bell rang. She brought her clothes and a
note. The note was from Betsy. Betsy reminded her that Liza Merkalova
and Baroness Shtoltz were coming to play croquet with her that morning
with their adorers, Kaluzhsky and old Stremov. "Come, if only as a study
in morals. I shall expect you," she finished.

Anna read the note and heaved a deep sigh.

Annushka went out, but Anna did not begin dressing, and sat in the same
position, her head and hands hanging listlessly, and every now and then
she shivered all over, seemed as though she would make some gesture,
utter some word, and sank back into lifelessness again. She repeated
continually, "My God! my God!" But neither "God" nor "my" had any
meaning to her. The idea of seeking help in her difficulty in religion
was as remote from her as seeking help from Alexey Alexandrovitch
himself, although she had never had doubts of the faith in which she had
been brought up. She knew that the support of religion was possible only
upon condition of renouncing what made up for her the whole meaning of
life. She was not simply miserable, she began to feel alarm at the new
spiritual condition, never experienced before, in which she found
herself. She felt as though everything were beginning to be double in
her soul, just as objects sometimes appear double to over-tired eyes.
She hardly knew at times what it was she feared, and what she hoped for.
Whether she feared or desired what had happened, or what was going to
happen, and exactly what she longed for, she could not have said.

"The coffee is ready, and mademoiselle and Seryozha are waiting," said
Annushka, coming back again and finding Anna in the same position.

"Seryozha? What about Seryozha?" Anna asked, with sudden eagerness,
recollecting her son’s existence for the first time that morning.

The recollection of her son suddenly roused Anna from the helpless
condition in which she found herself. She recalled the partly sincere,
though greatly exaggerated, rôle of the mother living for her child,
which she had taken up of late years, and she felt with joy that in the
plight in which she found herself she had a support, quite apart from
her relation to her husband or to Vronsky. This support was her son. In
whatever position she might be placed, she could not lose her son. Her
husband might put her to shame and turn her out, Vronsky might grow cold
to her and go on living his own life apart (she thought of him again
with bitterness and reproach); she could not leave her son. She had an
aim in life. And she must act; act to secure this relation to her son,
so that he might not be taken from her. Quickly indeed, as quickly as
possible, she must take action before he was taken from her. She must
take her son and go away. Here was the one thing she had to do now. She
needed consolation. She must be calm, and get out of this insufferable
position. The thought of immediate action binding her to her son, of
going away somewhere with him, gave her this consolation.

The governess, after saying good-morning, began a long and detailed
account of Seryozha’s naughtiness, but Anna did not hear her; she was
considering whether she would take her with her or not. "No, I won’t
take her," she decided. "I’ll go alone with my child."

"Yes, it’s very wrong," said Anna, and taking her son by the shoulder
she looked at him, not severely, but with a timid glance that bewildered
and delighted the boy, and she kissed him. "Leave him to me," she said
to the astonished governess, and not letting go of her son, she sat down
at the table, where coffee was set ready for her.

All the rooms of the summer villa were full of porters, gardeners, and
footmen going to and fro carrying out things. Cupboards and chests were
open; twice they had sent to the shop for cord; pieces of newspaper were
tossing about on the floor. Two trunks, some bags and strapped-up rugs,
had been carried down into the hall. The carriage and two hired cabs
were waiting at the steps. Anna, forgetting her inward agitation in the
work of packing, was standing at a table in her boudoir, packing her
traveling bag, when Annushka called her attention to the rattle of some
carriage driving up. Anna looked out of the window and saw Alexey
Alexandrovitch’s courier on the steps, ringing at the front door bell.

"An answer? Yes," said Anna. "Let him wait. I’ll ring."

The croquet party to which the Princess Tverskaya had invited Anna was
to consist of two ladies and their adorers. These two ladies were the
chief representatives of a select new Petersburg circle, nicknamed, in
imitation of some imitation, _les sept merveilles du monde_. These
ladies belonged to a circle which, though of the highest society, was
utterly hostile to that in which Anna moved. Moreover, Stremov, one of
the most influential people in Petersburg, and the elderly admirer of
Liza Merkalova, was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the political
world. From all these considerations Anna had not meant to go, and the
hints in Princess Tverskaya’s note referred to her refusal. But now Anna
was eager to go, in the hope of seeing Vronsky.

Anna arrived at Princess Tverskaya’s earlier than the other guests.

At the same moment as she entered, Vronsky’s footman, with side-whiskers
combed out like a _Kammerjunker_, went in too. He stopped at the door,
and, taking off his cap, let her pass. Anna recognized him, and only
then recalled that Vronsky had told her the day before that he would not
come. Most likely he was sending a note to say so.

The position of uncertainty, of indecision, was still the same as at
home—worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any step,
impossible to see Vronsky, and she had to remain here among outsiders,
in company so uncongenial to her present mood. But she was wearing a
dress that she knew suited her. She was not alone; all around was that
luxurious setting of idleness that she was used to, and she felt less
wretched than at home. She was not forced to think what she was to do.
Everything would be done of itself. On meeting Betsy coming towards her
in a white gown that struck her by its elegance, Anna smiled at her just
as she always did. Princess Tverskaya was walking with Tushkevitch and a
young lady, a relation, who, to the great joy of her parents in the
provinces, was spending the summer with the fashionable princess.

There was probably something unusual about Anna, for Betsy noticed it at
once.

"I slept badly," answered Anna, looking intently at the footman who came
to meet them, and, as she supposed, brought Vronsky’s note.

"How glad I am you’ve come!" said Betsy. "I’m tired, and was just
longing to have some tea before they come. You might go"—she turned to
Tushkevitch—"with Masha, and try the croquet ground over there where
they’ve been cutting it. We shall have time to talk a little over tea;
we’ll have a cozy chat, eh?" she said in English to Anna, with a smile,
pressing the hand with which she held a parasol.

"Yes, especially as I can’t stay very long with you. I’m forced to go on
to old Madame Vrede. I’ve been promising to go for a century," said
Anna, to whom lying, alien as it was to her nature, had become not
merely simple and natural in society, but a positive source of
satisfaction. Why she said this, which she had not thought of a second
before, she could not have explained. She had said it simply from the
reflection that as Vronsky would not be here, she had better secure her
own freedom, and try to see him somehow. But why she had spoken of old
Madame Vrede, whom she had to go and see, as she had to see many other
people, she could not have explained; and yet, as it afterwards turned
out, had she contrived the most cunning devices to meet Vronsky, she
could have thought of nothing better.

"No. I’m not going to let you go for anything," answered Betsy, looking
intently into Anna’s face. "Really, if I were not fond of you, I should
feel offended. One would think you were afraid my society would
compromise you. Tea in the little dining room, please," she said, half
closing her eyes, as she always did when addressing the footman.

"Alexey’s playing us false," she said in French; "he writes that he
can’t come," she added in a tone as simple and natural as though it
could never enter her head that Vronsky could mean anything more to Anna
than a game of croquet. Anna knew that Betsy knew everything, but,
hearing how she spoke of Vronsky before her, she almost felt persuaded
for a minute that she knew nothing.

"Ah!" said Anna indifferently, as though not greatly interested in the
matter, and she went on smiling: "How can you or your friends compromise
anyone?"

This playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a great
fascination for Anna, as, indeed, it has for all women. And it was not
the necessity of concealment, not the aim with which the concealment was
contrived, but the process of concealment itself which attracted her.

Betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from her good-humored,
shrewd glance, Anna felt that she partly guessed her plight, and was
hatching something for her benefit. They were in the little boudoir.

Without a moment’s thought, Anna sat down to the table with Betsy’s
letter, and, without reading it, wrote below: "It’s essential for me to
see you. Come to the Vrede garden. I shall be there at six o’clock." She
sealed it up, and, Betsy coming back, in her presence handed the note to
be taken.

"She’s very sweet, and I always liked her," said Anna.

"But do tell me, please, I never could make it out," said Anna, after
being silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed she was not
asking an idle question, but that what she was asking was of more
importance to her than it should have been; "do tell me, please, what
are her relations with Prince Kaluzhsky, Mishka, as he’s called? I’ve
met them so little. What does it mean?"

Betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at Anna.

"No; you laugh," said Anna, laughing too in spite of herself, "but I
never could understand it. I can’t understand the husband’s rôle in it."

"Will you be at Madame Rolandak’s fête?" asked Anna, to change the
conversation.

"I don’t think so," answered Betsy, and, without looking at her friend,
she began filling the little transparent cups with fragrant tea. Putting
a cup before Anna, she took out a cigarette, and, fitting it into a
silver holder, she lighted it.

"How I should like to know other people just as I know myself!" said
Anna, seriously and dreamily. "Am I worse than other people, or better?
I think I’m worse."

Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was struck by her
beauty, the exaggerated extreme to which her dress was carried, and the
boldness of her manners. On her head there was such a superstructure of
soft, golden hair—her own and false mixed—that her head was equal in
size to the elegantly rounded bust, of which so much was exposed in
front. The impulsive abruptness of her movements was such that at every
step the lines of her knees and the upper part of her legs were
distinctly marked under her dress, and the question involuntarily rose
to the mind where in the undulating, piled-up mountain of material at
the back the real body of the woman, so small and slender, so naked in
front, and so hidden behind and below, really came to an end.

Betsy made haste to introduce her to Anna.

"Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers," she began telling them
at once, using her eyes, smiling and twitching away her tail, which she
flung back at one stroke all on one side. "I drove here with Vaska....
Ah, to be sure, you don’t know each other." And mentioning his surname
she introduced the young man, and reddening a little, broke into a
ringing laugh at her mistake—that is, at her having called him Vaska to
a stranger. Vaska bowed once more to Anna, but he said nothing to her.
He addressed Sappho: "You’ve lost your bet. We got here first. Pay up,"
said he, smiling.

Soon after Prince Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza Merkalova with Stremov.
Liza Merkalova was a thin brunette, with an Oriental, languid type of
face, and—as everyone used to say—exquisite enigmatic eyes. The tone of
her dark dress (Anna immediately observed and appreciated the fact) was
in perfect harmony with her style of beauty. Liza was as soft and
enervated as Sappho was smart and abrupt.

But to Anna’s taste Liza was far more attractive. Betsy had said to Anna
that she had adopted the pose of an innocent child, but when Anna saw
her, she felt that this was not the truth. She really was both innocent
and corrupt, but a sweet and passive woman. It is true that her tone was
the same as Sappho’s; that like Sappho, she had two men, one young and
one old, tacked onto her, and devouring her with their eyes. But there
was something in her higher than what surrounded her. There was in her
the glow of the real diamond among glass imitations. This glow shone out
in her exquisite, truly enigmatic eyes. The weary, and at the same time
passionate, glance of those eyes, encircled by dark rings, impressed one
by its perfect sincerity. Everyone looking into those eyes fancied he
knew her wholly, and knowing her, could not but love her. At the sight
of Anna, her whole face lighted up at once with a smile of delight.

"Ah, how glad I am to see you!" she said, going up to her. "Yesterday at
the races all I wanted was to get to you, but you’d gone away. I did so
want to see you, yesterday especially. Wasn’t it awful?" she said,
looking at Anna with eyes that seemed to lay bare all her soul.

"Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling," said Anna, blushing.

"I’m not going," said Liza, smiling and settling herself close to Anna.
"You won’t go either, will you? Who wants to play croquet?"

"Oh, I like it," said Anna.

"How can you be bored? Why, you live in the liveliest set in
Petersburg," said Anna.

"Ah, how dreary it all was!" said Liza Merkalova. "We all drove back to
my place after the races. And always the same people, always the same.
Always the same thing. We lounged about on sofas all the evening. What
is there to enjoy in that? No; do tell me how you manage never to be
bored?" she said, addressing Anna again. "One has but to look at you and
one sees, here’s a woman who may be happy or unhappy, but isn’t bored.
Tell me how you do it?"

"I do nothing," answered Anna, blushing at these searching questions.

"That’s the best way," Stremov put in. Stremov was a man of fifty,
partly gray, but still vigorous-looking, very ugly, but with a
characteristic and intelligent face. Liza Merkalova was his wife’s
niece, and he spent all his leisure hours with her. On meeting Anna
Karenina, as he was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the government, he
tried, like a shrewd man and a man of the world, to be particularly
cordial with her, the wife of his enemy.

"‘Nothing,’" he put in with a subtle smile, "that’s the very best way. I
told you long ago," he said, turning to Liza Merkalova, "that if you
don’t want to be bored, you mustn’t think you’re going to be bored. It’s
just as you mustn’t be afraid of not being able to fall asleep, if
you’re afraid of sleeplessness. That’s just what Anna Arkadyevna has
just said."

"I should be very glad if I had said it, for it’s not only clever but
true," said Anna, smiling.

"You’re incorrigible," said Stremov, not looking at her, and he spoke
again to Anna. As he rarely met Anna, he could say nothing but
commonplaces to her, but he said those commonplaces as to when she was
returning to Petersburg, and how fond Countess Lidia Ivanovna was of
her, with an expression which suggested that he longed with his whole
soul to please her and show his regard for her and even more than that.

"No, don’t go away, please don’t," pleaded Liza Merkalova, hearing that
Anna was going. Stremov joined in her entreaties.

Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty. This shrewd man’s
flattering words, the naïve, childlike affection shown her by Liza
Merkalova, and all the social atmosphere she was used to,—it was all so
easy, and what was in store for her was so difficult, that she was for a
minute in uncertainty whether to remain, whether to put off a little
longer the painful moment of explanation. But remembering what was in
store for her alone at home, if she did not come to some decision,
remembering that gesture—terrible even in memory—when she had clutched
her hair in both hands—she said good-bye and went away.

What Vronsky attacked first as being the easiest was his pecuniary
position. Writing out on note paper in his minute hand all that he owed,
he added up the amount and found that his debts amounted to seventeen
thousand and some odd hundreds, which he left out for the sake of
clearness. Reckoning up his money and his bank book, he found that he
had left one thousand eight hundred roubles, and nothing coming in
before the New Year. Reckoning over again his list of debts, Vronsky
copied it, dividing it into three classes. In the first class he put the
debts which he would have to pay at once, or for which he must in any
case have the money ready so that on demand for payment there could not
be a moment’s delay in paying. Such debts amounted to about four
thousand: one thousand five hundred for a horse, and two thousand five
hundred as surety for a young comrade, Venovsky, who had lost that sum
to a cardsharper in Vronsky’s presence. Vronsky had wanted to pay the
money at the time (he had that amount then), but Venovsky and Yashvin
had insisted that they would pay and not Vronsky, who had not played.
That was so far well, but Vronsky knew that in this dirty business,
though his only share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to be
surety for Venovsky, it was absolutely necessary for him to have the two
thousand five hundred roubles so as to be able to fling it at the
swindler, and have no more words with him. And so for this first and
most important division he must have four thousand roubles. The second
class—eight thousand roubles—consisted of less important debts. These
were principally accounts owing in connection with his race horses, to
the purveyor of oats and hay, the English saddler, and so on. He would
have to pay some two thousand roubles on these debts too, in order to be
quite free from anxiety. The last class of debts—to shops, to hotels, to
his tailor—were such as need not be considered. So that he needed at
least six thousand roubles for current expenses, and he only had one
thousand eight hundred. For a man with one hundred thousand roubles of
revenue, which was what everyone fixed as Vronsky’s income, such debts,
one would suppose, could hardly be embarrassing; but the fact was that
he was far from having one hundred thousand. His father’s immense
property, which alone yielded a yearly income of two hundred thousand,
was left undivided between the brothers. At the time when the elder
brother, with a mass of debts, married Princess Varya Tchirkova, the
daughter of a Decembrist without any fortune whatever, Alexey had given
up to his elder brother almost the whole income from his father’s
estate, reserving for himself only twenty-five thousand a year from it.
Alexey had said at the time to his brother that that sum would be
sufficient for him until he married, which he probably never would do.
And his brother, who was in command of one of the most expensive
regiments, and was only just married, could not decline the gift. His
mother, who had her own separate property, had allowed Alexey every year
twenty thousand in addition to the twenty-five thousand he had reserved,
and Alexey had spent it all. Of late his mother, incensed with him on
account of his love affair and his leaving Moscow, had given up sending
him the money. And in consequence of this, Vronsky, who had been in the
habit of living on the scale of forty-five thousand a year, having only
received twenty thousand that year, found himself now in difficulties.
To get out of these difficulties, he could not apply to his mother for
money. Her last letter, which he had received the day before, had
particularly exasperated him by the hints in it that she was quite ready
to help him to succeed in the world and in the army, but not to lead a
life which was a scandal to all good society. His mother’s attempt to
buy him stung him to the quick and made him feel colder than ever to
her. But he could not draw back from the generous word when it was once
uttered, even though he felt now, vaguely foreseeing certain
eventualities in his intrigue with Madame Karenina, that this generous
word had been spoken thoughtlessly, and that even though he were not
married he might need all the hundred thousand of income. But it was
impossible to draw back. He had only to recall his brother’s wife, to
remember how that sweet, delightful Varya sought, at every convenient
opportunity, to remind him that she remembered his generosity and
appreciated it, to grasp the impossibility of taking back his gift. It
was as impossible as beating a woman, stealing, or lying. One thing only
could and ought to be done, and Vronsky determined upon it without an
instant’s hesitation: to borrow money from a money-lender, ten thousand
roubles, a proceeding which presented no difficulty, to cut down his
expenses generally, and to sell his race horses. Resolving on this, he
promptly wrote a note to Rolandak, who had more than once sent to him
with offers to buy horses from him. Then he sent for the Englishman and
the money-lender, and divided what money he had according to the
accounts he intended to pay. Having finished this business, he wrote a
cold and cutting answer to his mother. Then he took out of his notebook
three notes of Anna’s, read them again, burned them, and remembering
their conversation on the previous day, he sank into meditation.

Vronsky’s life was particularly happy in that he had a code of
principles, which defined with unfailing certitude what he ought and
what he ought not to do. This code of principles covered only a very
small circle of contingencies, but then the principles were never
doubtful, and Vronsky, as he never went outside that circle, had never
had a moment’s hesitation about doing what he ought to do. These
principles laid down as invariable rules: that one must pay a
cardsharper, but need not pay a tailor; that one must never tell a lie
to a man, but one may to a woman; that one must never cheat anyone, but
one may a husband; that one must never pardon an insult, but one may
give one and so on. These principles were possibly not reasonable and
not good, but they were of unfailing certainty, and so long as he
adhered to them, Vronsky felt that his heart was at peace and he could
hold his head up. Only quite lately in regard to his relations with
Anna, Vronsky had begun to feel that his code of principles did not
fully cover all possible contingencies, and to foresee in the future
difficulties and perplexities for which he could find no guiding clue.

His present relation to Anna and to her husband was to his mind clear
and simple. It was clearly and precisely defined in the code of
principles by which he was guided.

His attitude to the husband was the clearest of all. From the moment
that Anna loved Vronsky, he had regarded his own right over her as the
one thing unassailable. Her husband was simply a superfluous and
tiresome person. No doubt he was in a pitiable position, but how could
that be helped? The one thing the husband had a right to was to demand
satisfaction with a weapon in his hand, and Vronsky was prepared for
this at any minute.

"You have never loved," Vronsky said softly, looking straight before him
and thinking of Anna.

"I’m happy, very happy!" he said to himself. He had often before had
this sense of physical joy in his own body, but he had never felt so
fond of himself, of his own body, as at that moment. He enjoyed the
slight ache in his strong leg, he enjoyed the muscular sensation of
movement in his chest as he breathed. The bright, cold August day, which
had made Anna feel so hopeless, seemed to him keenly stimulating, and
refreshed his face and neck that still tingled from the cold water. The
scent of brilliantine on his whiskers struck him as particularly
pleasant in the fresh air. Everything he saw from the carriage window,
everything in that cold pure air, in the pale light of the sunset, was
as fresh, and gay, and strong as he was himself: the roofs of the houses
shining in the rays of the setting sun, the sharp outlines of fences and
angles of buildings, the figures of passers-by, the carriages that met
him now and then, the motionless green of the trees and grass, the
fields with evenly drawn furrows of potatoes, and the slanting shadows
that fell from the houses, and trees, and bushes, and even from the rows
of potatoes—everything was bright like a pretty landscape just finished
and freshly varnished.

"I want nothing, nothing but this happiness," he thought, staring at the
bone button of the bell in the space between the windows, and picturing
to himself Anna just as he had seen her last time. "And as I go on, I
love her more and more. Here’s the garden of the Vrede Villa.
Whereabouts will she be? Where? How? Why did she fix on this place to
meet me, and why does she write in Betsy’s letter?" he thought,
wondering now for the first time at it. But there was now no time for
wonder. He called to the driver to stop before reaching the avenue, and
opening the door, jumped out of the carriage as it was moving, and went
into the avenue that led up to the house. There was no one in the
avenue; but looking round to the right he caught sight of her. Her face
was hidden by a veil, but he drank in with glad eyes the special
movement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of the shoulders,
and the setting of the head, and at once a sort of electric shock ran
all over him. With fresh force, he felt conscious of himself from the
springy motions of his legs to the movements of his lungs as he
breathed, and something set his lips twitching.

"Why can’t they?" Anna said, restraining her tears, and obviously
attaching no sort of consequence to what he said. She felt that her fate
was sealed.

Anna’s carriage, which she had sent away, and ordered to come back to
the little gate of the Vrede garden, drove up. Anna said good-bye to
Vronsky, and drove home.

Absorbed in business with the chief secretary, Alexey Alexandrovitch had
completely forgotten that it was Tuesday, the day fixed by him for the
return of Anna Arkadyevna, and he was surprised and received a shock of
annoyance when a servant came in to inform him of her arrival.

Anna had arrived in Petersburg early in the morning; the carriage had
been sent to meet her in accordance with her telegram, and so Alexey
Alexandrovitch might have known of her arrival. But when she arrived, he
did not meet her. She was told that he had not yet gone out, but was
busy with his secretary. She sent word to her husband that she had come,
went to her own room, and occupied herself in sorting out her things,
expecting he would come to her. But an hour passed; he did not come. She
went into the dining room on the pretext of giving some directions, and
spoke loudly on purpose, expecting him to come out there; but he did not
come, though she heard him go to the door of his study as he parted from
the chief secretary. She knew that he usually went out quickly to his
office, and she wanted to see him before that, so that their attitude to
one another might be defined.

On seeing her, he would have risen, but changed his mind, then his face
flushed hotly—a thing Anna had never seen before, and he got up quickly
and went to meet her, looking not at her eyes, but above them at her
forehead and hair. He went up to her, took her by the hand, and asked
her to sit down.

"But our relations cannot be the same as always," Anna began in a timid
voice, looking at him with dismay.

Anna sighed and bowed her head.

Anna got up too. Bowing in silence, he let her pass before him.

The Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in the same house, met
every day, but were complete strangers to one another. Alexey
Alexandrovitch made it a rule to see his wife every day, so that the
servants might have no grounds for suppositions, but avoided dining at
home. Vronsky was never at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house, but Anna saw
him away from home, and her husband was aware of it.

The position was one of misery for all three; and not one of them would
have been equal to enduring this position for a single day, if it had
not been for the expectation that it would change, that it was merely a
temporary painful ordeal which would pass over. Alexey Alexandrovitch
hoped that this passion would pass, as everything does pass, that
everyone would forget about it, and his name would remain unsullied.
Anna, on whom the position depended, and for whom it was more miserable
than for anyone, endured it because she not merely hoped, but firmly
believed, that it would all very soon be settled and come right. She had
not the least idea what would settle the position, but she firmly
believed that something would very soon turn up now. Vronsky, against
his own will or wishes, followed her lead, hoped too that something,
apart from his own action, would be sure to solve all difficulties.

When he got home, Vronsky found there a note from Anna. She wrote, "I am
ill and unhappy. I cannot come out, but I cannot go on longer without
seeing you. Come in this evening. Alexey Alexandrovitch goes to the
council at seven and will be there till ten." Thinking for an instant of
the strangeness of her bidding him come straight to her, in spite of her
husband’s insisting on her not receiving him, he decided to go.

Vronsky had that winter got his promotion, was now a colonel, had left
the regimental quarters, and was living alone. After having some lunch,
he lay down on the sofa immediately, and in five minutes memories of the
hideous scenes he had witnessed during the last few days were confused
together and joined on to a mental image of Anna and of the peasant who
had played an important part in the bear hunt, and Vronsky fell asleep.
He waked up in the dark, trembling with horror, and made haste to light
a candle. "What was it? What? What was the dreadful thing I dreamed?
Yes, yes; I think a little dirty man with a disheveled beard was
stooping down doing something, and all of a sudden he began saying some
strange words in French. Yes, there was nothing else in the dream," he
said to himself. "But why was it so awful?" He vividly recalled the
peasant again and those incomprehensible French words the peasant had
uttered, and a chill of horror ran down his spine.

It was half-past eight already. He rang up his servant, dressed in
haste, and went out onto the steps, completely forgetting the dream and
only worried at being late. As he drove up to the Karenins’ entrance he
looked at his watch and saw it was ten minutes to nine. A high, narrow
carriage with a pair of grays was standing at the entrance. He
recognized Anna’s carriage. "She is coming to me," thought Vronsky, "and
better she should. I don’t like going into that house. But no matter; I
can’t hide myself," he thought, and with that manner peculiar to him
from childhood, as of a man who has nothing to be ashamed of, Vronsky
got out of his sledge and went to the door. The door opened, and the
hall porter with a rug on his arm called the carriage. Vronsky, though
he did not usually notice details, noticed at this moment the amazed
expression with which the porter glanced at him. In the very doorway
Vronsky almost ran up against Alexey Alexandrovitch. The gas jet threw
its full light on the bloodless, sunken face under the black hat and on
the white cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat. Karenin’s
fixed, dull eyes were fastened upon Vronsky’s face. Vronsky bowed, and
Alexey Alexandrovitch, chewing his lips, lifted his hand to his hat and
went on. Vronsky saw him without looking round get into the carriage,
pick up the rug and the opera-glass at the window and disappear. Vronsky
went into the hall. His brows were scowling, and his eyes gleamed with a
proud and angry light in them.

Vronsky’s ideas had changed since the day of his conversation with Anna
in the Vrede garden. Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of Anna—who
had surrendered herself up to him utterly, and simply looked to him to
decide her fate, ready to submit to anything—he had long ceased to think
that their tie might end as he had thought then. His ambitious plans had
retreated into the background again, and feeling that he had got out of
that circle of activity in which everything was definite, he had given
himself entirely to his passion, and that passion was binding him more
and more closely to her.

"Anna, you hurt me. Don’t you trust me? Haven’t I told you that I
haven’t a thought I wouldn’t lay bare to you?"

And again she could not help mimicking him: "‘Anna, _ma chère_; Anna,
dear’!"

"He’s not a man, not a human being—he’s a doll! No one knows him; but I
know him. Oh, if I’d been in his place, I’d long ago have killed, have
torn to pieces a wife like me. I wouldn’t have said, ‘Anna, _ma chère_’!
He’s not a man, he’s an official machine. He doesn’t understand that I’m
your wife, that he’s outside, that he’s superfluous.... Don’t let’s talk
of him!..."

Anna, who had thought she knew her husband so well, was amazed at his
appearance when he went in to her. His brow was lowering, and his eyes
stared darkly before him, avoiding her eyes; his mouth was tightly and
contemptuously shut. In his walk, in his gestures, in the sound of his
voice there was a determination and firmness such as his wife had never
seen in him. He went into her room, and without greeting her, walked
straight up to her writing-table, and taking her keys, opened a drawer.

"It’s worse than cruel—it’s base, if you want to know!" Anna cried, in a
rush of hatred, and getting up, she was going away.

"Tell me, how is my darling Anna?"

"Yes, please, do come," said Dolly; "we will expect you at five, or six
o’clock, if you like. How is my darling Anna? How long..."

The second installment for the forest had been received from the
merchant and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable and
goodhumored of late, and the idea of the dinner pleased Stepan
Arkadyevitch from every point of view. He was in the most light-hearted
mood. There were two circumstances a little unpleasant, but these two
circumstances were drowned in the sea of good-humored gaiety which
flooded the soul of Stepan Arkadyevitch. These two circumstances were:
first, that on meeting Alexey Alexandrovitch the day before in the
street he had noticed that he was cold and reserved with him, and
putting the expression of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face and the fact that
he had not come to see them or let them know of his arrival with the
rumors he had heard about Anna and Vronsky, Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed
that something was wrong between the husband and wife.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, on coming back from church service, had spent the
whole morning indoors. He had two pieces of business before him that
morning; first, to receive and send on a deputation from the native
tribes which was on its way to Petersburg, and now at Moscow; secondly,
to write the promised letter to the lawyer. The deputation, though it
had been summoned at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s instigation, was not
without its discomforting and even dangerous aspect, and he was glad he
had found it in Moscow. The members of this deputation had not the
slightest conception of their duty and the part they were to play. They
naïvely believed that it was their business to lay before the commission
their needs and the actual condition of things, and to ask assistance of
the government, and utterly failed to grasp that some of their
statements and requests supported the contention of the enemy’s side,
and so spoiled the whole business. Alexey Alexandrovitch was busily
engaged with them for a long while, drew up a program for them from
which they were not to depart, and on dismissing them wrote a letter to
Petersburg for the guidance of the deputation. He had his chief support
in this affair in the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. She was a specialist in
the matter of deputations, and no one knew better than she how to manage
them, and put them in the way they should go. Having completed this
task, Alexey Alexandrovitch wrote the letter to the lawyer. Without the
slightest hesitation he gave him permission to act as he might judge
best. In the letter he enclosed three of Vronsky’s notes to Anna, which
were in the portfolio he had taken away.

"I will say one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch. I know you for an
excellent, upright man; I know Anna—excuse me, I can’t change my opinion
of her—for a good, an excellent woman; and so, excuse me, I cannot
believe it. There is some misunderstanding," said he.

"This is awful!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I would do one thing, Alexey
Alexandrovitch. I beseech you, do it!" he said. "No action has yet been
taken, if I understand rightly. Before you take advice, see my wife,
talk to her. She loves Anna like a sister, she loves you, and she’s a
wonderful woman. For God’s sake, talk to her! Do me that favor, I
beseech you!"

Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna’s innocence, and she
felt herself growing pale and her lips quivering with anger at this
frigid, unfeeling man, who was so calmly intending to ruin her innocent
friend.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, with desperate resolution looking him
in the face, "I asked you about Anna, you made me no answer. How is
she?"

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no right ... but I love Anna
as a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I beseech you to tell me what is
wrong between you? what fault do you find with her?"

"I presume that your husband has told you the grounds on which I
consider it necessary to change my attitude to Anna Arkadyevna?" he
said, not looking her in the face, but eyeing with displeasure
Shtcherbatsky, who was walking across the drawing room.

"Anna and sin—I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!"

"No, wait a minute. You must not ruin her. Wait a little; I will tell
you about myself. I was married, and my husband deceived me; in anger
and jealousy, I would have thrown up everything, I would myself.... But
I came to myself again; and who did it? Anna saved me. And here I am
living on. The children are growing up, my husband has come back to his
family, and feels his fault, is growing purer, better, and I live on....
I have forgiven it, and you ought to forgive!"

"Something else in the same line," he said to himself bitterly, opening
the second telegram. The telegram was from his wife. Her name, written
in blue pencil, "Anna," was the first thing that caught his eye. "I am
dying; I beg, I implore you to come. I shall die easier with your
forgiveness," he read. He smiled contemptuously, and flung down the
telegram. That this was a trick and a fraud, of that, he thought for the
first minute, there could be no doubt.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky’s tears, felt a rush of that
nervous emotion always produced in him by the sight of other people’s
suffering, and turning away his face, he moved hurriedly to the door,
without hearing the rest of his words. From the bedroom came the sound
of Anna’s voice saying something. Her voice was lively, eager, with
exceedingly distinct intonations. Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the
bedroom, and went up to the bed. She was lying turned with her face
towards him. Her cheeks were flushed crimson, her eyes glittered, her
little white hands thrust out from the sleeves of her dressing gown were
playing with the quilt, twisting it about. It seemed as though she were
not only well and blooming, but in the happiest frame of mind. She was
talking rapidly, musically, and with exceptionally correct articulation
and expressive intonation.

"Anna Arkadyevna, he has come. Here he is!" said the midwife, trying to
attract her attention to Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Oh, what nonsense!" Anna went on, not seeing her husband. "No, give her
to me; give me my little one! He has not come yet. You say he won’t
forgive me, because you don’t know him. No one knows him. I’m the only
one, and it was hard for me even. His eyes I ought to know—Seryozha has
just the same eyes—and I can’t bear to see them because of it. Has
Seryozha had his dinner? I know everyone will forget him. He would not
forget. Seryozha must be moved into the corner room, and Mariette must
be asked to sleep with him."

Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna, again hid his face
in his hands.

After the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch, Vronsky went out onto
the steps of the Karenins’ house and stood still, with difficulty
remembering where he was, and where he ought to walk or drive. He felt
disgraced, humiliated, guilty, and deprived of all possibility of
washing away his humiliation. He felt thrust out of the beaten track
along which he had so proudly and lightly walked till then. All the
habits and rules of his life that had seemed so firm, had turned out
suddenly false and inapplicable. The betrayed husband, who had figured
till that time as a pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhat
ludicrous obstacle to his happiness, had suddenly been summoned by her
herself, elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on the pinnacle that
husband had shown himself, not malignant, not false, not ludicrous, but
kind and straightforward and large. Vronsky could not but feel this, and
the parts were suddenly reversed. Vronsky felt his elevation and his own
abasement, his truth and his own falsehood. He felt that the husband was
magnanimous even in his sorrow, while he had been base and petty in his
deceit. But this sense of his own humiliation before the man he had
unjustly despised made up only a small part of his misery. He felt
unutterably wretched now, for his passion for Anna, which had seemed to
him of late to be growing cooler, now that he knew he had lost her
forever, was stronger than ever it had been. He had seen all of her in
her illness, had come to know her very soul, and it seemed to him that
he had never loved her till then. And now when he had learned to know
her, to love her as she should be loved, he had been humiliated before
her, and had lost her forever, leaving with her nothing of himself but a
shameful memory. Most terrible of all had been his ludicrous, shameful
position when Alexey Alexandrovitch had pulled his hands away from his
humiliated face. He stood on the steps of the Karenins’ house like one
distraught, and did not know what to do.

"You may trample me in the mud," he heard Alexey Alexandrovitch’s words
and saw him standing before him, and saw Anna’s face with its burning
flush and glittering eyes, gazing with love and tenderness not at him
but at Alexey Alexandrovitch; he saw his own, as he fancied, foolish and
ludicrous figure when Alexey Alexandrovitch took his hands away from his
face. He stretched out his legs again and flung himself on the sofa in
the same position and shut his eyes.

"To sleep! To forget!" he repeated to himself. But with his eyes shut he
saw more distinctly than ever Anna’s face as it had been on the
memorable evening before the races.

"That is not and will not be, and she wants to wipe it out of her
memory. But I cannot live without it. How can we be reconciled? how can
we be reconciled?" he said aloud, and unconsciously began to repeat
these words. This repetition checked the rising up of fresh images and
memories, which he felt were thronging in his brain. But repeating words
did not check his imagination for long. Again in extraordinarily rapid
succession his best moments rose before his mind, and then his recent
humiliation. "Take away his hands," Anna’s voice says. He takes away his
hands and feels the shamestruck and idiotic expression of his face.

"What’s this? Am I going out of my mind?" he said to himself. "Perhaps.
What makes men go out of their minds; what makes men shoot themselves?"
he answered himself, and opening his eyes, he saw with wonder an
embroidered cushion beside him, worked by Varya, his brother’s wife. He
touched the tassel of the cushion, and tried to think of Varya, of when
he had seen her last. But to think of anything extraneous was an
agonizing effort. "No, I must sleep!" He moved the cushion up, and
pressed his head into it, but he had to make an effort to keep his eyes
shut. He jumped up and sat down. "That’s all over for me," he said to
himself. "I must think what to do. What is left?" His mind rapidly ran
through his life apart from his love of Anna.

When the softening effect of the near approach of death had passed away,
Alexey Alexandrovitch began to notice that Anna was afraid of him, ill
at ease with him, and could not look him straight in the face. She
seemed to be wanting, and not daring, to tell him something; and as
though foreseeing their present relations could not continue, she seemed
to be expecting something from him.

Towards the end of February it happened that Anna’s baby daughter, who
had been named Anna too, fell ill. Alexey Alexandrovitch was in the
nursery in the morning, and leaving orders for the doctor to be sent
for, he went to his office. On finishing his work, he returned home at
four. Going into the hall he saw a handsome groom, in a braided livery
and a bear fur cape, holding a white fur cloak.

During all this difficult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had noticed that
his worldly acquaintances, especially women, took a peculiar interest in
him and his wife. All these acquaintances he observed with difficulty
concealing their mirth at something; the same mirth that he had
perceived in the lawyer’s eyes, and just now in the eyes of this groom.
Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as though they had just been
at a wedding. When they met him, with ill-disguised enjoyment they
inquired after his wife’s health. The presence of Princess Tverskaya was
unpleasant to Alexey Alexandrovitch from the memories associated with
her, and also because he disliked her, and he went straight to the
nursery. In the day nursery Seryozha, leaning on the table with his legs
on a chair, was drawing and chatting away merrily. The English
governess, who had during Anna’s illness replaced the French one, was
sitting near the boy knitting a shawl. She hurriedly got up, curtseyed,
and pulled Seryozha.

"Who’s one to say it to? Anna Arkadyevna still ill..." said the nurse
discontentedly.

"It’s not for my husband; for myself I don’t wish it. Don’t say that!"
answered Anna’s excited voice.

Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering black
curls on her round head, was sitting on a settee. The eagerness died out
of her face, as it always did, at the sight of her husband; she dropped
her head and looked round uneasily at Betsy. Betsy, dressed in the
height of the latest fashion, in a hat that towered somewhere over her
head like a shade on a lamp, in a blue dress with violet crossway
stripes slanting one way on the bodice and the other way on the skirt,
was sitting beside Anna, her tall flat figure held erect. Bowing her
head, she greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.

"Ah!" she said, as though surprised. "I’m very glad you’re at home. You
never put in an appearance anywhere, and I haven’t seen you ever since
Anna has been ill. I have heard all about it—your anxiety. Yes, you’re a
wonderful husband!" she said, with a meaning and affable air, as though
she were bestowing an order of magnanimity on him for his conduct to his
wife.

She got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at her hand.

"Well, good-bye, my darling," said Betsy, getting up. She kissed Anna,
and went out. Alexey Alexandrovitch escorted her out.

"I am very grateful for your confidence in me." He repeated gently in
Russian the phrase he had said in Betsy’s presence in French, and sat
down beside her. When he spoke to her in Russian, using the Russian
"thou" of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably irritating to
Anna. "And I am very grateful for your decision. I, too, imagine that
since he is going away, there is no sort of necessity for Count Vronsky
to come here. However, if..."

"But I’ve said so already, so why repeat it?" Anna suddenly interrupted
him with an irritation she could not succeed in repressing. "No sort of
necessity," she thought, "for a man to come and say good-bye to the
woman he loves, for whom he was ready to ruin himself, and has ruined
himself, and who cannot live without him. No sort of necessity!" she
compressed her lips, and dropped her burning eyes to his hands with
their swollen veins. They were rubbing each other.

"I don’t believe a word of what’s said about her," said Anna quickly. "I
know she really cares for me."

Never had the impossibility of his position in the world’s eyes, and his
wife’s hatred of him, and altogether the might of that mysterious brutal
force that guided his life against his spiritual inclinations, and
exacted conformity with its decrees and change in his attitude to his
wife, been presented to him with such distinctness as that day. He saw
clearly that all the world and his wife expected of him something, but
what exactly, he could not make out. He felt that this was rousing in
his soul a feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of all
the good of his achievement. He believed that for Anna herself it would
be better to break off all relations with Vronsky; but if they all
thought this out of the question, he was even ready to allow these
relations to be renewed, so long as the children were not disgraced, and
he was not deprived of them nor forced to change his position. Bad as
this might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which would put her
in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything he
cared for. But he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that every one was
against him, and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to him
now so natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong,
though it seemed the proper thing to them.

"Oh, I’m so glad!" answered Betsy, at once understanding that he was
speaking of Anna. And going back into the drawing room, they stood in a
corner. "He’s killing her," said Betsy in a whisper full of meaning.
"It’s impossible, impossible..."

"I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices," Anna
began suddenly, "but I hate him for his virtues. I can’t live with him.
Do you understand? the sight of him has a physical effect on me, it
makes me beside myself. I can’t, I can’t live with him. What am I to do?
I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn’t be more unhappy, but
the awful state of things I am going through now, I could never have
conceived. Would you believe it, that knowing he’s a good man, a
splendid man, that I’m not worth his little finger, still I hate him. I
hate him for his generosity. And there’s nothing left for me but..."

And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. No one else in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
place, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile (the
smile would have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so much of
sweetness and almost feminine tenderness that his smile did not wound,
but softened and soothed. His gentle, soothing words and smiles were as
soothing and softening as almond oil. And Anna soon felt this.

"A fearful mistake!" said Anna.

Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.

"If you care to know my opinion," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with the same
smile of softening, almond-oil tenderness with which he had been talking
to Anna. His kindly smile was so winning that Alexey Alexandrovitch,
feeling his own weakness and unconsciously swayed by it, was ready to
believe what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.

What would become of his son in case of a divorce? To leave him with his
mother was out of the question. The divorced mother would have her own
illegitimate family, in which his position as a stepson and his
education would not be good. Keep him with him? He knew that would be an
act of vengeance on his part, and that he did not want. But apart from
this, what more than all made divorce seem impossible to Alexey
Alexandrovitch was, that by consenting to a divorce he would be
completely ruining Anna. The saying of Darya Alexandrovna at Moscow,
that in deciding on a divorce he was thinking of himself, and not
considering that by this he would be ruining her irrevocably, had sunk
into his heart. And connecting this saying with his forgiveness of her,
with his devotion to the children, he understood it now in his own way.
To consent to a divorce, to give her her freedom, meant in his thoughts
to take from himself the last tie that bound him to life—the children
whom he loved; and to take from her the last prop that stayed her on the
path of right, to thrust her down to her ruin. If she were divorced, he
knew she would join her life to Vronsky’s, and their tie would be an
illegitimate and criminal one, since a wife, by the interpretation of
the ecclesiastical law, could not marry while her husband was living.
"She will join him, and in a year or two he will throw her over, or she
will form a new tie," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch. "And I, by agreeing
to an unlawful divorce, shall be to blame for her ruin." He had thought
it all over hundreds of times, and was convinced that a divorce was not
at all simple, as Stepan Arkadyevitch had said, but was utterly
impossible. He did not believe a single word Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
him; to every word he had a thousand objections to make, but he listened
to him, feeling that his words were the expression of that mighty brutal
force which controlled his life and to which he would have to submit.

"To see her once and then to bury myself, to die," he thought, and as he
was paying farewell visits, he uttered this thought to Betsy. Charged
with this commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and brought him back a
negative reply.

Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced that
she had heard through Oblonsky as a positive fact that Alexey
Alexandrovitch had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore Vronsky could
see Anna.

Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had thought what she
would say to him, but she did not succeed in saying anything of it; his
passion mastered her. She tried to calm him, to calm herself, but it was
too late. His feeling infected her. Her lips trembled so that for a long
while she could say nothing.

A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone with his son in his
house at Petersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone abroad, not having
obtained a divorce, but having absolutely declined all idea of one.

Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer. She was
deeply moved. The tears stood in her eyes, and she could not have spoken
without crying. She was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin; going back in
thought to her own wedding, she glanced at the radiant figure of Stepan
Arkadyevitch, forgot all the present, and remembered only her own
innocent love. She recalled not herself only, but all her women-friends
and acquaintances. She thought of them on the one day of their triumph,
when they had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown, with love and
hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and stepping
forward into the mysterious future. Among the brides that came back to
her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose proposed
divorce she had just been hearing. And she had stood just as innocent in
orange flowers and bridal veil. And now? "It’s terribly strange," she
said to herself. It was not merely the sisters, the women-friends and
female relations of the bride who were following every detail of the
ceremony. Women who were quite strangers, mere spectators, were watching
it excitedly, holding their breath, in fear of losing a single movement
or expression of the bride and bridegroom, and angrily not answering,
often not hearing, the remarks of the callous men, who kept making
joking or irrelevant observations.

Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in Europe.
They had visited Venice, Rome, and Naples, and had just arrived at a
small Italian town where they meant to stay some time. A handsome head
waiter, with thick pomaded hair parted from the neck upwards, an evening
coat, a broad white cambric shirt front, and a bunch of trinkets hanging
above his rounded stomach, stood with his hands in the full curve of his
pockets, looking contemptuously from under his eyelids while he gave
some frigid reply to a gentleman who had stopped him. Catching the sound
of footsteps coming from the other side of the entry towards the
staircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing the Russian count,
who had taken their best rooms, he took his hands out of his pockets
deferentially, and with a bow informed him that a courier had been, and
that the business about the palazzo had been arranged. The steward was
prepared to sign the agreement.

"Yes, he’s a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly,"
Vronsky said to himself, catching the significance of Golenishtchev’s
face and the change of subject. "I can introduce him to Anna, he looks
at it properly."

During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with Anna, he
had always on meeting new people asked himself how the new person would
look at his relations with Anna, and for the most part, in men, he had
met with the "proper" way of looking at it. But if he had been asked,
and those who looked at it "properly" had been asked, exactly how they
did look at it, both he and they would have been greatly puzzled to
answer.

He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and still
more by the frankness with which she accepted her position. She blushed
when Vronsky brought in Golenishtchev, and he was extremely charmed by
this childish blush overspreading her candid and handsome face. But what
he liked particularly was the way in which at once, as though on purpose
that there might be no misunderstanding with an outsider, she called
Vronsky simply Alexey, and said they were moving into a house they had
just taken, what was here called a palazzo. Golenishtchev liked this
direct and simple attitude to her own position. Looking at Anna’s manner
of simple-hearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing Alexey Alexandrovitch
and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that he understood her perfectly. He
fancied that he understood what she was utterly unable to understand:
how it was that, having made her husband wretched, having abandoned him
and her son and lost her good name, she yet felt full of spirits,
gaiety, and happiness.

"I tell you what: it’s a lovely day, let’s go and have another look at
it," said Vronsky, addressing Anna.

Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing of the
first part of the _Two Elements_, of which the author spoke as something
well known. But as Golenishtchev began to lay down his opinions and
Vronsky was able to follow them even without knowing the _Two Elements_,
he listened to him with some interest, for Golenishtchev spoke well. But
Vronsky was startled and annoyed by the nervous irascibility with which
Golenishtchev talked of the subject that engrossed him. As he went on
talking, his eyes glittered more and more angrily; he was more and more
hurried in his replies to imaginary opponents, and his face grew more
and more excited and worried. Remembering Golenishtchev, a thin, lively,
good-natured and well-bred boy, always at the head of the class, Vronsky
could not make out the reason of his irritability, and he did not like
it. What he particularly disliked was that Golenishtchev, a man
belonging to a good set, should put himself on a level with some
scribbling fellows, with whom he was irritated and angry. Was it worth
it? Vronsky disliked it, yet he felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, and
was sorry for him. Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visible
on his mobile, rather handsome face, while without even noticing Anna’s
coming in, he went on hurriedly and hotly expressing his views.

When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her lovely hand rapidly
swinging her parasol, and stood beside him, it was with a feeling of
relief that Vronsky broke away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishtchev
which fastened persistently upon him, and with a fresh rush of love
looked at his charming companion, full of life and happiness.
Golenishtchev recovered himself with an effort, and at first was
dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel friendly with everyone
as she was at that time, soon revived his spirits by her direct and
lively manner. After trying various subjects of conversation, she got
him upon painting, of which he talked very well, and she listened to him
attentively. They walked to the house they had taken, and looked over
it.

"I am very glad of one thing," said Anna to Golenishtchev when they were
on their way back, "Alexey will have a capital _atelier_. You must
certainly take that room," she said to Vronsky in Russian, using the
affectionately familiar form as though she saw that Golenishtchev would
become intimate with them in their isolation, and that there was no need
of reserve before him.

"He has great talent," said Anna with a delighted smile. "I’m no judge,
of course. But good judges have said the same."

Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid return to
health, felt herself unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life. The
thought of her husband’s unhappiness did not poison her happiness. On
one side that memory was too awful to be thought of. On the other side
her husband’s unhappiness had given her too much happiness to be
regretted. The memory of all that had happened after her illness: her
reconciliation with her husband, its breakdown, the news of Vronsky’s
wound, his visit, the preparations for divorce, the departure from her
husband’s house, the parting from her son—all that seemed to her like a
delirious dream, from which she had waked up alone with Vronsky abroad.
The thought of the harm caused to her husband aroused in her a feeling
like repulsion, and akin to what a drowning man might feel who has
shaken off another man clinging to him. That man did drown. It was an
evil action, of course, but it was the sole means of escape, and better
not to brood over these fearful facts.

One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had occurred to her at the
first moment of the final rupture, and when now she recalled all the
past, she remembered that one reflection. "I have inevitably made that
man wretched," she thought; "but I don’t want to profit by his misery. I
too am suffering, and shall suffer; I am losing what I prized above
everything—I am losing my good name and my son. I have done wrong, and
so I don’t want happiness, I don’t want a divorce, and shall suffer from
my shame and the separation from my child." But, however sincerely Anna
had meant to suffer, she was not suffering. Shame there was not. With
the tact of which both had such a large share, they had succeeded in
avoiding Russian ladies abroad, and so had never placed themselves in a
false position, and everywhere they had met people who pretended that
they perfectly understood their position, far better indeed than they
did themselves. Separation from the son she loved—even that did not
cause her anguish in these early days. The baby girl—_his_ child—was so
sweet, and had so won Anna’s heart, since she was all that was left her,
that Anna rarely thought of her son.

The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was so
intense, and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant, that Anna
felt unpardonably happy. The more she got to know Vronsky, the more she
loved him. She loved him for himself, and for his love for her. Her
complete ownership of him was a continual joy to her. His presence was
always sweet to her. All the traits of his character, which she learned
to know better and better, were unutterably dear to her. His appearance,
changed by his civilian dress, was as fascinating to her as though she
were some young girl in love. In everything he said, thought, and did,
she saw something particularly noble and elevated. Her adoration of him
alarmed her indeed; she sought and could not find in him anything not
fine. She dared not show him her sense of her own insignificance beside
him. It seemed to her that, knowing this, he might sooner cease to love
her; and she dreaded nothing now so much as losing his love, though she
had no grounds for fearing it. But she could not help being grateful to
him for his attitude to her, and showing that she appreciated it. He,
who had in her opinion such a marked aptitude for a political career, in
which he would have been certain to play a leading part—he had
sacrificed his ambition for her sake, and never betrayed the slightest
regret. He was more lovingly respectful to her than ever, and the
constant care that she should not feel the awkwardness of her position
never deserted him for a single instant. He, so manly a man, never
opposed her, had indeed, with her, no will of his own, and was anxious,
it seemed, for nothing but to anticipate her wishes. And she could not
but appreciate this, even though the very intensity of his solicitude
for her, the atmosphere of care with which he surrounded her, sometimes
weighed upon her.

Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what he had
so long desired, was not perfectly happy. He soon felt that the
realization of his desires gave him no more than a grain of sand out of
the mountain of happiness he had expected. It showed him the mistake men
make in picturing to themselves happiness as the realization of their
desires. For a time after joining his life to hers, and putting on
civilian dress, he had felt all the delight of freedom in general of
which he had known nothing before, and of freedom in his love,—and he
was content, but not for long. He was soon aware that there was
springing up in his heart a desire for desires—_ennui_. Without
conscious intention he began to clutch at every passing caprice, taking
it for a desire and an object. Sixteen hours of the day must be occupied
in some way, since they were living abroad in complete freedom, outside
the conditions of social life which filled up time in Petersburg. As for
the amusements of bachelor existence, which had provided Vronsky with
entertainment on previous tours abroad, they could not be thought of,
since the sole attempt of the sort had led to a sudden attack of
depression in Anna, quite out of proportion with the cause—a late supper
with bachelor friends. Relations with the society of the place—foreign
and Russian—were equally out of the question owing to the irregularity
of their position. The inspection of objects of interest, apart from the
fact that everything had been seen already, had not for Vronsky, a
Russian and a sensible man, the immense significance Englishmen are able
to attach to that pursuit.

More than any other style he liked the French—graceful and effective—and
in that style he began to paint Anna’s portrait in Italian costume, and
the portrait seemed to him, and to everyone who saw it, extremely
successful.

"What is the subject of the picture?" asked Anna.

"Couldn’t we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?" said
Vronsky.

"Why mine?" said Anna. "After yours I don’t want another portrait.
Better have one of Annie" (so she called her baby girl). "Here she is,"
she added, looking out of the window at the handsome Italian nurse, who
was carrying the child out into the garden, and immediately glancing
unnoticed at Vronsky. The handsome nurse, from whom Vronsky was painting
a head for his picture, was the one hidden grief in Anna’s life. He
painted with her as his model, admired her beauty and mediaevalism, and
Anna dared not confess to herself that she was afraid of becoming
jealous of this nurse, and was for that reason particularly gracious and
condescending both to her and her little son. Vronsky, too, glanced out
of the window and into Anna’s eyes, and, turning at once to
Golenishtchev, he said:

"I have met him. But he’s a queer fish, and quite without breeding. You
know, one of those uncouth new people one’s so often coming across
nowadays, one of those free-thinkers you know, who are reared _d’emblée_
in theories of atheism, scepticism, and materialism. In former days,"
said Golenishtchev, not observing, or not willing to observe, that both
Anna and Vronsky wanted to speak, "in former days the free-thinker was a
man who had been brought up in ideas of religion, law, and morality, and
only through conflict and struggle came to free-thought; but now there
has sprung up a new type of born free-thinkers who grow up without even
having heard of principles of morality or of religion, of the existence
of authorities, who grow up directly in ideas of negation in everything,
that is to say, savages. Well, he’s of that class. He’s the son, it
appears, of some Moscow butler, and has never had any sort of
bringing-up. When he got into the academy and made his reputation he
tried, as he’s no fool, to educate himself. And he turned to what seemed
to him the very source of culture—the magazines. In old times, you see,
a man who wanted to educate himself—a Frenchman, for instance—would have
set to work to study all the classics and theologians and tragedians and
historiaris and philosophers, and, you know, all the intellectual work
that came in his way. But in our day he goes straight for the literature
of negation, very quickly assimilates all the extracts of the science of
negation, and he’s ready. And that’s not all—twenty years ago he would
have found in that literature traces of conflict with authorities, with
the creeds of the ages; he would have perceived from this conflict that
there was something else; but now he comes at once upon a literature in
which the old creeds do not even furnish matter for discussion, but it
is stated baldly that there is nothing else—evolution, natural
selection, struggle for existence—and that’s all. In my article I’ve..."

"I tell you what," said Anna, who had for a long while been exchanging
wary glances with Vronsky, and knew that he was not in the least
interested in the education of this artist, but was simply absorbed by
the idea of assisting him, and ordering a portrait of him; "I tell you
what," she said, resolutely interrupting Golenishtchev, who was still
talking away, "let’s go and see him!"

An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by her side and Vronsky on the
front seat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to a new ugly house in
the remote suburb. On learning from the porter’s wife, who came out to
them, that Mihailov saw visitors at his studio, but that at that moment
he was in his lodging only a couple of steps off, they sent her to him
with their cards, asking permission to see his picture.

He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in spite of his
excitement he was struck by the soft light on Anna’s figure as she stood
in the shade of the entrance listening to Golenishtchev, who was eagerly
telling her something, while she evidently wanted to look round at the
artist. He was himself unconscious how, as he approached them, he seized
on this impression and absorbed it, as he had the chin of the shopkeeper
who had sold him the cigars, and put it away somewhere to be brought out
when he wanted it. The visitors, not agreeably impressed beforehand by
Golenishtchev’s account of the artist, were still less so by his
personal appearance. Thick-set and of middle height, with nimble
movements, with his brown hat, olive-green coat and narrow
trousers—though wide trousers had been a long while in fashion,—most of
all, with the ordinariness of his broad face, and the combined
expression of timidity and anxiety to keep up his dignity, Mihailov made
an unpleasant impression.

That fellow (Golenishtchev) was a Russian living here. Mihailov did not
remember his surname nor where he had met him, nor what he had said to
him. He only remembered his face as he remembered all the faces he had
ever seen; but he remembered, too, that it was one of the faces laid by
in his memory in the immense class of the falsely consequential and poor
in expression. The abundant hair and very open forehead gave an
appearance of consequence to the face, which had only one expression—a
petty, childish, peevish expression, concentrated just above the bridge
of the narrow nose. Vronsky and Madame Karenina must be, Mihailov
supposed, distinguished and wealthy Russians, knowing nothing about art,
like all those wealthy Russians, but posing as amateurs and
connoisseurs. "Most likely they’ve already looked at all the antiques,
and now they’re making the round of the studios of the new people, the
German humbug, and the cracked Pre-Raphaelite English fellow, and have
only come to me to make the point of view complete," he thought. He was
well acquainted with the way dilettanti have (the cleverer they were the
worse he found them) of looking at the works of contemporary artists
with the sole object of being in a position to say that art is a thing
of the past, and that the more one sees of the new men the more one sees
how inimitable the works of the great old masters have remained. He
expected all this; he saw it all in their faces, he saw it in the
careless indifference with which they talked among themselves, stared at
the lay figures and busts, and walked about in leisurely fashion,
waiting for him to uncover his picture. But in spite of this, while he
was turning over his studies, pulling up the blinds and taking off the
sheet, he was in intense excitement, especially as, in spite of his
conviction that all distinguished and wealthy Russians were certain to
be beasts and fools, he liked Vronsky, and still more Anna.

"I think I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you," he said, looking
uneasily first at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of losing any shade of
their expression.

All Mihailov’s mobile face beamed at once; his eyes sparkled. He tried
to say something, but he could not speak for excitement, and pretended
to be coughing. Low as was his opinion of Golenishtchev’s capacity for
understanding art, trifling as was the true remark upon the fidelity of
the expression of Pilate as an official, and offensive as might have
seemed the utterance of so unimportant an observation while nothing was
said of more serious points, Mihailov was in an ecstasy of delight at
this observation. He had himself thought about Pilate’s figure just what
Golenishtchev said. The fact that this reflection was but one of
millions of reflections, which as Mihailov knew for certain would be
true, did not diminish for him the significance of Golenishtchev’s
remark. His heart warmed to Golenishtchev for this remark, and from a
state of depression he suddenly passed to ecstasy. At once the whole of
his picture lived before him in all the indescribable complexity of
everything living. Mihailov again tried to say that that was how he
understood Pilate, but his lips quivered intractably, and he could not
pronounce the words. Vronsky and Anna too said something in that subdued
voice in which, partly to avoid hurting the artist’s feelings and partly
to avoid saying out loud something silly—so easily said when talking of
art—people usually speak at exhibitions of pictures. Mihailov fancied
that the picture had made an impression on them too. He went up to them.

"How marvelous Christ’s expression is!" said Anna. Of all she saw she
liked that expression most of all, and she felt that it was the center
of the picture, and so praise of it would be pleasant to the artist.
"One can see that He is pitying Pilate."

"Yes, yes, marvelous!" Golenishtchev and Anna assented. In spite of the
excited condition in which he was, the sentence about technique had sent
a pang to Mihailov’s heart, and looking angrily at Vronsky he suddenly
scowled. He had often heard this word technique, and was utterly unable
to understand what was understood by it. He knew that by this term was
understood a mechanical facility for painting or drawing, entirely apart
from its subject. He had noticed often that even in actual praise
technique was opposed to essential quality, as though one could paint
well something that was bad. He knew that a great deal of attention and
care was necessary in taking off the coverings, to avoid injuring the
creation itself, and to take off all the coverings; but there was no art
of painting—no technique of any sort—about it. If to a little child or
to his cook were revealed what he saw, it or she would have been able to
peel the wrappings off what was seen. And the most experienced and
adroit painter could not by mere mechanical facility paint anything if
the lines of the subject were not revealed to him first. Besides, he saw
that if it came to talking about technique, it was impossible to praise
him for it. In all he had painted and repainted he saw faults that hurt
his eyes, coming from want of care in taking off the wrappings—faults he
could not correct now without spoiling the whole. And in almost all the
figures and faces he saw, too, remnants of the wrappings not perfectly
removed that spoiled the picture.

Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regretting their
friend’s flow of cleverness. At last Vronsky, without waiting for the
artist, walked away to another small picture.

Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way home, were particularly
lively and cheerful. They talked of Mihailov and his pictures. The word
_talent_, by which they meant an inborn, almost physical, aptitude apart
from brain and heart, and in which they tried to find an expression for
all the artist had gained from life, recurred particularly often in
their talk, as though it were necessary for them to sum up what they had
no conception of, though they wanted to talk of it. They said that there
was no denying his talent, but that his talent could not develop for
want of education—the common defect of our Russian artists. But the
picture of the boys had imprinted itself on their memories, and they
were continually coming back to it. "What an exquisite thing! How he has
succeeded in it, and how simply! He doesn’t even comprehend how good it
is. Yes, I mustn’t let it slip; I must buy it," said Vronsky.

Mihailov sold Vronsky his picture, and agreed to paint a portrait of
Anna. On the day fixed he came and began the work.

In another man’s house, and especially in Vronsky’s palazzo, Mihailov
was quite a different man from what he was in his studio. He behaved
with hostile courtesy, as though he were afraid of coming closer to
people he did not respect. He called Vronsky "your excellency," and
notwithstanding Anna’s and Vronsky’s invitations, he would never stay to
dinner, nor come except for the sittings. Anna was even more friendly to
him than to other people, and was very grateful for her portrait.
Vronsky was more than cordial with him, and was obviously interested to
know the artist’s opinion of his picture. Golenishtchev never let slip
an opportunity of instilling sound ideas about art into Mihailov. But
Mihailov remained equally chilly to all of them. Anna was aware from his
eyes that he liked looking at her, but he avoided conversation with her.
Vronsky’s talk about his painting he met with stubborn silence, and he
was as stubbornly silent when he was shown Vronsky’s picture. He was
unmistakably bored by Golenishtchev’s conversation, and he did not
attempt to oppose him.

Anna’s portrait—the same subject painted from nature both by him and by
Mihailov—ought to have shown Vronsky the difference between him and
Mihailov; but he did not see it. Only after Mihailov’s portrait was
painted he left off painting his portrait of Anna, deciding that it was
now not needed. His picture of mediaeval life he went on with. And he
himself, and Golenishtchev, and still more Anna, thought it very good,
because it was far more like the celebrated pictures they knew than
Mihailov’s picture.

Mihailov meanwhile, although Anna’s portrait greatly fascinated him, was
even more glad than they were when the sittings were over, and he had no
longer to listen to Golenishtchev’s disquisitions upon art, and could
forget about Vronsky’s painting. He knew that Vronsky could not be
prevented from amusing himself with painting; he knew that he and all
dilettanti had a perfect right to paint what they liked, but it was
distasteful to him. A man could not be prevented from making himself a
big wax doll, and kissing it. But if the man were to come with the doll
and sit before a man in love, and begin caressing his doll as the lover
caressed the woman he loved, it would be distasteful to the lover. Just
such a distasteful sensation was what Mihailov felt at the sight of
Vronsky’s painting: he felt it both ludicrous and irritating, both
pitiable and offensive.

But without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of Anna, who
wondered at his loss of interest in it, struck them as intolerably
tedious in an Italian town. The palazzo suddenly seemed so obtrusively
old and dirty, the spots on the curtains, the cracks in the floors, the
broken plaster on the cornices became so disagreeably obvious, and the
everlasting sameness of Golenishtchev, and the Italian professor and the
German traveler became so wearisome, that they had to make some change.
They resolved to go to Russia, to the country. In Petersburg Vronsky
intended to arrange a partition of the land with his brother, while Anna
meant to see her son. The summer they intended to spend on Vronsky’s
great family estate.

From the moment when Alexey Alexandrovitch understood from his
interviews with Betsy and with Stepan Arkadyevitch that all that was
expected of him was to leave his wife in peace, without burdening her
with his presence, and that his wife herself desired this, he felt so
distraught that he could come to no decision of himself; he did not know
himself what he wanted now, and putting himself in the hands of those
who were so pleased to interest themselves in his affairs, he met
everything with unqualified assent. It was only when Anna had left his
house, and the English governess sent to ask him whether she should dine
with him or separately, that for the first time he clearly comprehended
his position, and was appalled by it. Most difficult of all in this
position was the fact that he could not in any way connect and reconcile
his past with what was now. It was not the past when he had lived
happily with his wife that troubled him. The transition from that past
to a knowledge of his wife’s unfaithfulness he had lived through
miserably already; that state was painful, but he could understand it.
If his wife had then, on declaring to him her unfaithfulness, left him,
he would have been wounded, unhappy, but he would not have been in the
hopeless position—incomprehensible to himself—in which he felt himself
now. He could not now reconcile his immediate past, his tenderness, his
love for his sick wife, and for the other man’s child with what was now
the case, that is with the fact that, as it were, in return for all this
he now found himself alone, put to shame, a laughing-stock, needed by no
one, and despised by everyone.

For the first two days after his wife’s departure Alexey Alexandrovitch
received applicants for assistance and his chief secretary, drove to the
committee, and went down to dinner in the dining room as usual. Without
giving himself a reason for what he was doing, he strained every nerve
of his being for those two days, simply to preserve an appearance of
composure, and even of indifference. Answering inquiries about the
disposition of Anna Arkadyevna’s rooms and belongings, he had exercised
immense self-control to appear like a man in whose eyes what had
occurred was not unforeseen nor out of the ordinary course of events,
and he attained his aim: no one could have detected in him signs of
despair. But on the second day after her departure, when Korney gave him
a bill from a fashionable draper’s shop, which Anna had forgotten to
pay, and announced that the clerk from the shop was waiting, Alexey
Alexandrovitch told him to show the clerk up.

While he was governor of a province, Anna’s aunt, a wealthy provincial
lady, had thrown him—middle-aged as he was, though young for a
governor—with her niece, and had succeeded in putting him in such a
position that he had either to declare himself or to leave the town.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was not long in hesitation. There were at the time
as many reasons for the step as against it, and there was no
overbalancing consideration to outweigh his invariable rule of
abstaining when in doubt. But Anna’s aunt had through a common
acquaintance insinuated that he had already compromised the girl, and
that he was in honor bound to make her an offer. He made the offer, and
concentrated on his betrothed and his wife all the feeling of which he
was capable.

The attachment he felt to Anna precluded in his heart every need of
intimate relations with others. And now among all his acquaintances he
had not one friend. He had plenty of so-called connections, but no
friendships. Alexey Alexandrovitch had plenty of people whom he could
invite to dinner, to whose sympathy he could appeal in any public affair
he was concerned about, whose interest he could reckon upon for anyone
he wished to help, with whom he could candidly discuss other people’s
business and affairs of state. But his relations with these people were
confined to one clearly defined channel, and had a certain routine from
which it was impossible to depart. There was one man, a comrade of his
at the university, with whom he had made friends later, and with whom he
could have spoken of a personal sorrow; but this friend had a post in
the Department of Education in a remote part of Russia. Of the people in
Petersburg the most intimate and most possible were his chief secretary
and his doctor.

For several days now Countess Lidia Ivanovna had been in a state of
intense excitement. She had learned that Anna and Vronsky were in
Petersburg. Alexey Alexandrovitch must be saved from seeing her, he must
be saved even from the torturing knowledge that that awful woman was in
the same town with him, and that he might meet her any minute.

Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through her friends as to what those
_infamous people_, as she called Anna and Vronsky, intended doing, and
she endeavored so to guide every movement of her friend during those
days that he could not come across them. The young adjutant, an
acquaintance of Vronsky, through whom she obtained her information, and
who hoped through Countess Lidia Ivanovna to obtain a concession, told
her that they had finished their business and were going away next day.
Lidia Ivanovna had already begun to calm down, when the next morning a
note was brought her, the handwriting of which she recognized with
horror. It was the handwriting of Anna Karenina. The envelope was of
paper as thick as bark; on the oblong yellow paper there was a huge
monogram, and the letter smelt of agreeable scent.

Anna"

This letter attained the secret object which Countess Lidia Ivanovna had
concealed from herself. It wounded Anna to the quick.

On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the best
hotels; Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with her child, its
nurse, and her maid, in a large suite of four rooms.

On the day of his arrival Vronsky went to his brother’s. There he found
his mother, who had come from Moscow on business. His mother and
sister-in-law greeted him as usual: they asked him about his stay
abroad, and talked of their common acquaintances, but did not let drop a
single word in allusion to his connection with Anna. His brother came
the next morning to see Vronsky, and of his own accord asked him about
her, and Alexey Vronsky told him directly that he looked upon his
connection with Madame Karenina as marriage; that he hoped to arrange a
divorce, and then to marry her, and until then he considered her as much
a wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell their mother and his
wife so.

The elder brother, who had always a respect for his younger brother’s
judgment, could not well tell whether he was right or not till the world
had decided the question; for his part he had nothing against it, and
with Alexey he went up to see Anna.

Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna with a
certain formality, treating her as he might a very intimate friend, but
it was understood that his brother knew their real relations, and they
talked about Anna’s going to Vronsky’s estate.

In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in consequence of the
new position in which he was placed, laboring under a strange
misapprehension. One would have thought he must have understood that
society was closed for him and Anna; but now some vague ideas had sprung
up in his brain that this was only the case in old-fashioned days, and
that now with the rapidity of modern progress (he had unconsciously
become by now a partisan of every sort of progress) the views of society
had changed, and that the question whether they would be received in
society was not a foregone conclusion. "Of course," he thought, "she
would not be received at court, but intimate friends can and must look
at it in the proper light." One may sit for several hours at a stretch
with one’s legs crossed in the same position, if one knows that there’s
nothing to prevent one’s changing one’s position; but if a man knows
that he must remain sitting so with crossed legs, then cramps come on,
the legs begin to twitch and to strain towards the spot to which one
would like to draw them. This was what Vronsky was experiencing in
regard to the world. Though at the bottom of his heart he knew that the
world was shut on them, he put it to the test whether the world had not
changed by now and would not receive them. But he very quickly perceived
that though the world was open for him personally, it was closed for
Anna. Just as in the game of cat and mouse, the hands raised for him
were dropped to bar the way for Anna.

"At last!" she greeted him joyfully. "And Anna? How glad I am! Where are
you stopping? I can fancy after your delightful travels you must find
our poor Petersburg horrid. I can fancy your honeymoon in Rome. How
about the divorce? Is that all over?"

"People will throw stones at me, I know," she said, "but I shall come
and see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come. You won’t be here long, I
suppose?"

And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but her tone was
not at all the same as in former days. She unmistakably prided herself
on her courage, and wished Anna to appreciate the fidelity of her
friendship. She only stayed ten minutes, talking of society gossip, and
on leaving she said:

From Betsy’s tone Vronsky might have grasped what he had to expect from
the world; but he made another effort in his own family. His mother he
did not reckon upon. He knew that his mother, who had been so
enthusiastic over Anna at their first acquaintance, would have no mercy
on her now for having ruined her son’s career. But he had more hope of
Varya, his brother’s wife. He fancied she would not throw stones, and
would go simply and directly to see Anna, and would receive her in her
own house.

"You know, Alexey," she said after hearing him, "how fond I am of you,
and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not spoken,
because I knew I could be of no use to you and to Anna Arkadyevna," she
said, articulating the name "Anna Arkadyevna" with particular care.
"Don’t suppose, please, that I judge her. Never; perhaps in her place I
should have done the same. I don’t and can’t enter into that," she said,
glancing timidly at his gloomy face. "But one must call things by their
names. You want me to go and see her, to ask her here, and to
rehabilitate her in society; but do understand that I _cannot_ do so. I
have daughters growing up, and I must live in the world for my husband’s
sake. Well, I’m ready to come and see Anna Arkadyevna: she will
understand that I can’t ask her here, or I should have to do so in such
a way that she would not meet people who look at things differently;
that would offend her. I can’t raise her..."

Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that he
perceived all the time a sort of new mood that he could not understand
in Anna. At one time she would seem in love with him, and then she would
become cold, irritable, and impenetrable. She was worrying over
something, and keeping something back from him, and did not seem to
notice the humiliations which poisoned his existence, and for her, with
her delicate intuition, must have been still more unbearable.

One of Anna’s objects in coming back to Russia had been to see her son.
From the day she left Italy the thought of it had never ceased to
agitate her. And as she got nearer to Petersburg, the delight and
importance of this meeting grew ever greater in her imagination. She did
not even put to herself the question how to arrange it. It seemed to her
natural and simple to see her son when she should be in the same town
with him. But on her arrival in Petersburg she was suddenly made
distinctly aware of her present position in society, and she grasped the
fact that to arrange this meeting was no easy matter.

Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write to her a letter,
which cost her great pains, and in which she intentionally said that
permission to see her son must depend on her husband’s generosity. She
knew that if the letter were shown to her husband, he would keep up his
character of magnanimity, and would not refuse her request.

The commissionaire who took the letter had brought her back the most
cruel and unexpected answer, that there was no answer. She had never
felt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for the
commissionaire, she heard from him the exact account of how he had
waited, and how afterwards he had been told there was no answer. Anna
felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from her point of view
Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right. Her suffering was the more poignant
that she had to bear it in solitude. She could not and would not share
it with Vronsky. She knew that to him, although he was the primary cause
of her distress, the question of her seeing her son would seem a matter
of very little consequence. She knew that he would never be capable of
understanding all the depth of her suffering, that for his cool tone at
any allusion to it she would begin to hate him. And she dreaded that
more than anything in the world, and so she hid from him everything that
related to her son. Spending the whole day at home she considered ways
of seeing her son, and had reached a decision to write to her husband.
She was just composing this letter when she was handed the letter from
Lidia Ivanovna. The countess’s silence had subdued and depressed her,
but the letter, all that she read between the lines in it, so
exasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her passionate,
legitimate tenderness for her son, that she turned against other people
and left off blaming herself.

The next day, at eight o’clock in the morning, Anna got out of a hired
sledge and rang at the front entrance of her former home.

"Run and see what’s wanted. Some lady," said Kapitonitch, who, not yet
dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of the window and
seen a lady in a veil standing close up to the door. His assistant, a
lad Anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to her than she
came in, and pulling a three-rouble note out of her muff put it
hurriedly into his hand.

Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of the house
where she had lived for nine years would so greatly affect her. Memories
sweet and painful rose one after another in her heart, and for a moment
she forgot what she was here for.

Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what the
old man was saying.

"This way, to the left, if you please. Excuse its not being tidy. His
honor’s in the old parlor now," the hall porter said, panting. "Excuse
me, wait a little, your excellency; I’ll just see," he said, and
overtaking her, he opened the high door and disappeared behind it. Anna
stood still waiting. "He’s only just awake," said the hall porter,
coming out. And at the very instant the porter said this, Anna caught
the sound of a childish yawn. From the sound of this yawn alone she knew
her son and seemed to see him living before her eyes.

Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed in her
absence. She knew, and did not know, the bare legs so long now, that
were thrust out below the quilt, those short-cropped curls on his neck
in which she had so often kissed him. She touched all this and could say
nothing; tears choked her.

"Mistress, darling!" began the nurse, going up to Anna and kissing her
hands and shoulders. "God has brought joy indeed to our boy on his
birthday. You aren’t changed one bit."

"Oh, nurse dear, I didn’t know you were in the house," said Anna,
rousing herself for a moment.

"I’m not living here, I’m living with my daughter. I came for the
birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!"

"My sweet, my little one!" said Anna, and she cried as weakly and
childishly as he.

At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in a
scared whisper said, "He’s coming," and gave Anna her hat.

Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his hands.
Anna removed his hands, once more kissed his wet face, and with rapid
steps went to the door. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked in, meeting her.
Seeing her, he stopped short and bowed his head.

As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she had been
thinking of it and preparing herself for it, she had not in the least
expected that seeing him would affect her so deeply. On getting back to
her lonely rooms in the hotel she could not for a long while understand
why she was there. "Yes, it’s all over, and I am again alone," she said
to herself, and without taking off her hat she sat down in a low chair
by the hearth. Fixing her eyes on a bronze clock standing on a table
between the windows, she tried to think.

The Italian nurse, after having taken the baby out in her best, came in
with her, and brought her to Anna. The plump, well-fed little baby, on
seeing her mother, as she always did, held out her fat little hands, and
with a smile on her toothless mouth, began, like a fish with a float,
bobbing her fingers up and down the starched folds of her embroidered
skirt, making them rustle. It was impossible not to smile, not to kiss
the baby, impossible not to hold out a finger for her to clutch, crowing
and prancing all over; impossible not to offer her a lip which she
sucked into her little mouth by way of a kiss. And all this Anna did,
and took her in her arms and made her dance, and kissed her fresh little
cheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this child it was
plainer than ever to her that the feeling she had for her could not be
called love in comparison with what she felt for Seryozha. Everything in
this baby was charming, but for some reason all this did not go deep to
her heart. On her first child, though the child of an unloved father,
had been concentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction.
Her baby girl had been born in the most painful circumstances and had
not had a hundredth part of the care and thought which had been
concentrated on her first child. Besides, in the little girl everything
was still in the future, while Seryozha was by now almost a personality,
and a personality dearly loved. In him there was a conflict of thought
and feeling; he understood her, he loved her, he judged her, she
thought, recalling his words and his eyes. And she was forever—not
physically only but spiritually—divided from him, and it was impossible
to set this right.

"Come and dine with me," said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed with
herself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always did when she
defined her position before a fresh person. "The dinner here is not
good, but at least you will see him. There is no one of his old friends
in the regiment Alexey cares for as he does for you."

"Delighted," said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could see
that he liked Anna very much.

When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home. Soon after he had
left, some lady, so they told him, had come to see her, and she had gone
out with her. That she had gone out without leaving word where she was
going, that she had not yet come back, and that all the morning she had
been going about somewhere without a word to him—all this, together with
the strange look of excitement in her face in the morning, and the
recollection of the hostile tone with which she had before Yashvin
almost snatched her son’s photographs out of his hands, made him
serious. He decided he absolutely must speak openly with her. And he
waited for her in her drawing room. But Anna did not return alone, but
brought with her her old unmarried aunt, Princess Oblonskaya. This was
the lady who had come in the morning, and with whom Anna had gone out
shopping. Anna appeared not to notice Vronsky’s worried and inquiring
expression, and began a lively account of her morning’s shopping. He saw
that there was something working within her; in her flashing eyes, when
they rested for a moment on him, there was an intense concentration, and
in her words and movements there was that nervous rapidity and grace
which, during the early period of their intimacy, had so fascinated him,
but which now so disturbed and alarmed him.

The dinner was laid for four. All were gathered together and about to go
into the little dining room when Tushkevitch made his appearance with a
message from Princess Betsy. Princess Betsy begged her to excuse her not
having come to say good-bye; she had been indisposed, but begged Anna to
come to her between half-past six and nine o’clock. Vronsky glanced at
Anna at the precise limit of time, so suggestive of steps having been
taken that she should meet no one; but Anna appeared not to notice it.

"I should be very, very grateful to you," said Anna. "But won’t you dine
with us?"

Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug. He was at a complete loss to
understand what Anna was about. What had she brought the old Princess
Oblonskaya home for, what had she made Tushkevitch stay to dinner for,
and, most amazing of all, why was she sending him for a box? Could she
possibly think in her position of going to Patti’s benefit, where all
the circle of her acquaintances would be? He looked at her with serious
eyes, but she responded with that defiant, half-mirthful, half-desperate
look, the meaning of which he could not comprehend. At dinner Anna was
in aggressively high spirits—she almost flirted both with Tushkevitch
and with Yashvin. When they got up from dinner and Tushkevitch had gone
to get a box at the opera, Yashvin went to smoke, and Vronsky went down
with him to his own rooms. After sitting there for some time he ran
upstairs. Anna was already dressed in a low-necked gown of light silk
and velvet that she had had made in Paris, and with costly white lace on
her head, framing her face, and particularly becoming, showing up her
dazzling beauty.

"Anna, for God’s sake! what is the matter with you?" he said, appealing
to her exactly as once her husband had done.

Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against Anna,
almost a hatred for her willfully refusing to understand her own
position. This feeling was aggravated by his being unable to tell her
plainly the cause of his anger. If he had told her directly what he was
thinking, he would have said:

Their conversation about horses interested him, but he did not for an
instant forget Anna, and could not help listening to the sound of steps
in the corridor and looking at the clock on the chimney piece.

"Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to the
theater."

Vronsky had not yet seen Anna. He purposely avoided looking in her
direction. But he knew by the direction of people’s eyes where she was.
He looked round discreetly, but he was not seeking her; expecting the
worst, his eyes sought for Alexey Alexandrovitch. To his relief Alexey
Alexandrovitch was not in the theater that evening.

Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera glass from the stalls
and scanned the boxes. Near a lady in a turban and a bald old man, who
seemed to wave angrily in the moving opera glass, Vronsky suddenly
caught sight of Anna’s head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling in
the frame of lace. She was in the fifth box, twenty paces from him. She
was sitting in front, and slightly turning, was saying something to
Yashvin. The setting of her head on her handsome, broad shoulders, and
the restrained excitement and brilliance of her eyes and her whole face
reminded him of her just as he had seen her at the ball in Moscow. But
he felt utterly different towards her beauty now. In his feeling for her
now there was no element of mystery, and so her beauty, though it
attracted him even more intensely than before, gave him now a sense of
injury. She was not looking in his direction, but Vronsky felt that she
had seen him already.

When Vronsky turned the opera glass again in that direction, he noticed
that Princess Varvara was particularly red, and kept laughing
unnaturally and looking round at the next box. Anna, folding her fan and
tapping it on the red velvet, was gazing away and did not see, and
obviously did not wish to see, what was taking place in the next box.
Yashvin’s face wore the expression which was common when he was losing
at cards. Scowling, he sucked the left end of his mustache further and
further into his mouth, and cast sidelong glances at the next box.

In that box on the left were the Kartasovs. Vronsky knew them, and knew
that Anna was acquainted with them. Madame Kartasova, a thin little
woman, was standing up in her box, and, her back turned upon Anna, she
was putting on a mantle that her husband was holding for her. Her face
was pale and angry, and she was talking excitedly. Kartasov, a fat, bald
man, was continually looking round at Anna, while he attempted to soothe
his wife. When the wife had gone out, the husband lingered a long while,
and tried to catch Anna’s eye, obviously anxious to bow to her. But
Anna, with unmistakable intention, avoided noticing him, and talked to
Yashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to her. Kartasov went out
without making his salutation, and the box was left empty.

Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the
Kartasovs and Anna, but he saw that something humiliating for Anna had
happened. He knew this both from what he had seen, and most of all from
the face of Anna, who, he could see, was taxing every nerve to carry
through the part she had taken up. And in maintaining this attitude of
external composure she was completely successful. Anyone who did not
know her and her circle, who had not heard all the utterances of the
women expressive of commiseration, indignation, and amazement, that she
should show herself in society, and show herself so conspicuously with
her lace and her beauty, would have admired the serenity and loveliness
of this woman without a suspicion that she was undergoing the sensations
of a man in the stocks.

Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely what,
Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to find out
something, he went towards his brother’s box. Purposely choosing the way
round furthest from Anna’s box, he jostled as he came out against the
colonel of his old regiment talking to two acquaintances. Vronsky heard
the name of Madame Karenina, and noticed how the colonel hastened to
address Vronsky loudly by name, with a meaning glance at his companions.

Vronsky did not hear him. With rapid steps he went downstairs; he felt
that he must do something, but he did not know what. Anger with her for
having put herself and him in such a false position, together with pity
for her suffering, filled his heart. He went down, and made straight for
Anna’s box. At her box stood Stremov, talking to her.

"You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song," Anna said to
Vronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.

Anna was already at home. When Vronsky went up to her, she was in the
same dress as she had worn at the theater. She was sitting in the first
armchair against the wall, looking straight before her. She looked at
him, and at once resumed her former position.

"Anna," he said.

"Anna! How does the question of my love come in?"

"How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then," said Dolly, "and how
unhappy for her. It turned out quite the opposite," she said, struck by
her own ideas. "Then Anna was so happy, and Kitty thought herself
unhappy. Now it is just the opposite. I often think of her."

"Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna’s, and he’s going to them again?
You know they’re hardly fifty miles from you, and I too must certainly
go over there. Veslovsky, come here!"

"It’s exceedingly nice at their place," Veslovsky was telling them about
Vronsky and Anna. "I can’t, of course, take it upon myself to judge, but
in their house you feel the real feeling of home."

"Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?" Veslovsky asked her. "She’s a very
fascinating woman."

The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on the same
lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and whether love is
to be put higher than worldly considerations. Kitty disliked the
conversation, and she was disturbed both by the subject and the tone in
which it was conducted, and also by the knowledge of the effect it would
have on her husband. But she was too simple and innocent to know how to
cut short this conversation, or even to conceal the superficial pleasure
afforded her by the young man’s very obvious admiration. She wanted to
stop it, but she did not know what to do. Whatever she did she knew
would be observed by her husband, and the worst interpretation put on
it. And, in fact, when she asked Dolly what was wrong with Masha, and
Vassenka, waiting till this uninteresting conversation was over, began
to gaze indifferently at Dolly, the question struck Levin as an
unnatural and disgusting piece of hypocrisy.

Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see Anna. She
was sorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin disliked. She
quite understood how right the Levins were in not wishing to have
anything to do with Vronsky. But she felt she must go and see Anna, and
show her that her feelings could not be changed, in spite of the change
in her position. That she might be independent of the Levins in this
expedition, Darya Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses for
the drive; but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.

"From this village, they say, it’s five miles." The carriage drove along
the village street and onto a bridge. On the bridge was a crowd of
peasant women with coils of ties for the sheaves on their shoulders,
gaily and noisily chattering. They stood still on the bridge, staring
inquisitively at the carriage. All the faces turned to Darya
Alexandrovna looked to her healthy and happy, making her envious of
their enjoyment of life. "They’re all living, they’re all enjoying
life," Darya Alexandrovna still mused when she had passed the peasant
women and was driving uphill again at a trot, seated comfortably on the
soft springs of the old carriage, "while I, let out, as it were from
prison, from the world of worries that fret me to death, am only looking
about me now for an instant. They all live; those peasant women and my
sister Natalia and Varenka and Anna, whom I am going to see—all, but not
I.

"And they attack Anna. What for? am I any better? I have, anyway, a
husband I love—not as I should like to love him, still I do love him,
while Anna never loved hers. How is she to blame? She wants to live. God
has put that in our hearts. Very likely I should have done the same.
Even to this day I don’t feel sure I did right in listening to her at
that terrible time when she came to me in Moscow. I ought then to have
cast off my husband and have begun my life fresh. I might have loved and
have been loved in reality. And is it any better as it is? I don’t
respect him. He’s necessary to me," she thought about her husband, "and
I put up with him. Is that any better? At that time I could still have
been admired, I had beauty left me still," Darya Alexandrovna pursued
her thoughts, and she would have liked to look at herself in the looking
glass. She had a traveling looking glass in her handbag, and she wanted
to take it out; but looking at the backs of the coachman and the swaying
counting house clerk, she felt that she would be ashamed if either of
them were to look round, and she did not take out the glass.

But without looking in the glass, she thought that even now it was not
too late; and she thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was always
particularly attentive to her, of Stiva’s good-hearted friend,
Turovtsin, who had helped her nurse her children through the scarlatina,
and was in love with her. And there was someone else, a quite young man,
who—her husband had told her it as a joke—thought her more beautiful
than either of her sisters. And the most passionate and impossible
romances rose before Darya Alexandrovna’s imagination. "Anna did quite
right, and certainly I shall never reproach her for it. She is happy,
she makes another person happy, and she’s not broken down as I am, but
most likely just as she always was, bright, clever, open to every
impression," thought Darya Alexandrovna,—and a sly smile curved her
lips, for, as she pondered on Anna’s love affair, Darya Alexandrovna
constructed on parallel lines an almost identical love affair for
herself, with an imaginary composite figure, the ideal man who was in
love with her. She, like Anna, confessed the whole affair to her
husband. And the amazement and perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at this
avowal made her smile.

"Well, are they at home, my good man?" Darya Alexandrovna said vaguely,
not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.

They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback, and
Princess Varvara and Sviazhsky in the _char-à-banc_. They had gone out
to look at the working of a new reaping machine.

When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at a
walking pace. Anna was in front beside Veslovsky. Anna, quietly walking
her horse, a sturdy English cob with cropped mane and short tail, her
beautiful head with her black hair straying loose under her high hat,
her full shoulders, her slender waist in her black riding habit, and all
the ease and grace of her deportment, impressed Dolly.

For the first minute it seemed to her unsuitable for Anna to be on
horseback. The conception of riding on horseback for a lady was, in
Darya Alexandrovna’s mind, associated with ideas of youthful flirtation
and frivolity, which, in her opinion, was unbecoming in Anna’s position.
But when she had scrutinized her, seeing her closer, she was at once
reconciled to her riding. In spite of her elegance, everything was so
simple, quiet, and dignified in the attitude, the dress and the
movements of Anna, that nothing could have been more natural.

Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka Veslovsky
in his Scotch cap with floating ribbons, his stout legs stretched out in
front, obviously pleased with his own appearance. Darya Alexandrovna
could not suppress a good-humored smile as she recognized him. Behind
rode Vronsky on a dark bay mare, obviously heated from galloping. He was
holding her in, pulling at the reins.

Anna’s face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant when, in
the little figure huddled in a corner of the old carriage, she
recognized Dolly. She uttered a cry, started in the saddle, and set her
horse into a gallop. On reaching the carriage she jumped off without
assistance, and holding up her riding habit, she ran up to greet Dolly.

"That’s Princess Varvara," Anna said in reply to a glance of inquiry
from Dolly as the _char-à-banc_ drove up.

Princess Varvara was her husband’s aunt, and she had long known her, and
did not respect her. She knew that Princess Varvara had passed her whole
life toadying on her rich relations, but that she should now be sponging
on Vronsky, a man who was nothing to her, mortified Dolly on account of
her kinship with her husband. Anna noticed Dolly’s expression, and was
disconcerted by it. She blushed, dropped her riding habit, and stumbled
over it.

"No, stay as you were," said Anna, coming up, "and we’ll go in the
carriage," and taking Dolly’s arm, she drew her away.

Darya Alexandrovna’s eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant carriage of
a pattern she had never seen before, the splendid horses, and the
elegant and gorgeous people surrounding her. But what struck her most of
all was the change that had taken place in Anna, whom she knew so well
and loved. Any other woman, a less close observer, not knowing Anna
before, or not having thought as Darya Alexandrovna had been thinking on
the road, would not have noticed anything special in Anna. But now Dolly
was struck by that temporary beauty, which is only found in women during
the moments of love, and which she saw now in Anna’s face. Everything in
her face, the clearly marked dimples in her cheeks and chin, the line of
her lips, the smile which, as it were, fluttered about her face, the
brilliance of her eyes, the grace and rapidity of her movements, the
fulness of the notes of her voice, even the manner in which, with a sort
of angry friendliness, she answered Veslovsky when he asked permission
to get on her cob, so as to teach it to gallop with the right leg
foremost—it was all peculiarly fascinating, and it seemed as if she were
herself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.

When both the women were seated in the carriage, a sudden embarrassment
came over both of them. Anna was disconcerted by the intent look of
inquiry Dolly fixed upon her. Dolly was embarrassed because after
Sviazhsky’s phrase about "this vehicle," she could not help feeling
ashamed of the dirty old carriage in which Anna was sitting with her.
The coachman Philip and the counting house clerk were experiencing the
same sensation. The counting house clerk, to conceal his confusion,
busied himself settling the ladies, but Philip the coachman became
sullen, and was bracing himself not to be overawed in future by this
external superiority. He smiled ironically, looking at the raven horse,
and was already deciding in his own mind that this smart trotter in the
_char-à-banc_ was only good for _promenade_, and wouldn’t do thirty
miles straight off in the heat.

Anna looked at Dolly’s thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles filled
with dust from the road, and she was on the point of saying what she was
thinking, that is, that Dolly had got thinner. But, conscious that she
herself had grown handsomer, and that Dolly’s eyes were telling her so,
she sighed and began to speak about herself.

But Anna did not answer.

"I consider..." Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at that instant
Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with the right leg
foremost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up and down in his short
jacket on the chamois leather of the side saddle. "He’s doing it, Anna
Arkadyevna!" he shouted.

Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed to Darya
Alexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a long conversation in the
carriage, and so she cut short her thought.

Anna, taking her eyes off her friend’s face and dropping her eyelids
(this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her before), pondered,
trying to penetrate the full significance of the words. And obviously
interpreting them as she would have wished, she glanced at Dolly.

And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes. She pressed Anna’s hand in
silence.

"These are the servants’ houses, barns, and stables," answered Anna.
"And there the park begins. It had all gone to ruin, but Alexey had
everything renewed. He is very fond of this place, and, what I never
expected, he has become intensely interested in looking after it. But
his is such a rich nature! Whatever he takes up, he does splendidly. So
far from being bored by it, he works with passionate interest. He—with
his temperament as I know it—he has become careful and businesslike, a
first-rate manager, he positively reckons every penny in his management
of the land. But only in that. When it’s a question of tens of
thousands, he doesn’t think of money." She spoke with that gleefully sly
smile with which women often talk of the secret characteristics only
known to them—of those they love. "Do you see that big building? that’s
the new hospital. I believe it will cost over a hundred thousand; that’s
his hobby just now. And do you know how it all came about? The peasants
asked him for some meadowland, I think it was, at a cheaper rate, and he
refused, and I accused him of being miserly. Of course it was not really
because of that, but everything together, he began this hospital to
prove, do you see, that he was not miserly about money. _C’est une
petitesse_, if you like, but I love him all the more for it. And now
you’ll see the house in a moment. It was his grandfather’s house, and he
has had nothing changed outside."

"Ah, they’re here already!" said Anna, looking at the saddle horses,
which were just being led away from the steps. "It is a nice horse,
isn’t it? It’s my cob; my favorite. Lead him here and bring me some
sugar. Where is the count?" she inquired of two smart footmen who darted
out. "Ah, there he is!" she said, seeing Vronsky coming to meet her with
Veslovsky.

"Where are you going to put the princess?" said Vronsky in French,
addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, he once more greeted
Darya Alexandrovna, and this time he kissed her hand. "I think the big
balcony room."

"Oh, no, that’s too far off! Better in the corner room, we shall see
each other more. Come, let’s go up," said Anna, as she gave her favorite
horse the sugar the footman had brought her.

Anna turned to Dolly. "You can stay some time? For one day only? That’s
impossible!"

"No, Dolly, darling!... Well, we’ll see. Come along, come along!" and
Anna led Dolly to her room.

That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested, but the
one of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it. And this room,
for which excuse was needed, was more full of luxury than any in which
Dolly had ever stayed, a luxury that reminded her of the best hotels
abroad.

"Well, darling, how happy I am!" Anna said, sitting down in her riding
habit for a moment beside Dolly. "Tell me about all of you. Stiva I had
only a glimpse of, and he cannot tell one about the children. How is my
favorite, Tanya? Quite a big girl, I expect?"

"Oh, if I had known," said Anna, "that you do not despise me!... You
might have all come to us. Stiva’s an old friend and a great friend of
Alexey’s, you know," she added, and suddenly she blushed.

"But in my delight I’m talking nonsense. The one thing, darling, is that
I am so glad to have you!" said Anna, kissing her again. "You haven’t
told me yet how and what you think about me, and I keep wanting to know.
But I’m glad you will see me as I am. The chief thing I shouldn’t like
would be for people to imagine I want to prove anything. I don’t want to
prove anything; I merely want to live, to do no one harm but myself. I
have the right to do that, haven’t I? But it is a big subject, and we’ll
talk over everything properly later. Now I’ll go and dress and send a
maid to you."

Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady’s arrival, and began to
chatter away without a pause. Dolly observed that she was longing to
express her opinion in regard to her mistress’s position, especially as
to the love and devotion of the count to Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly
carefully interrupted her whenever she began to speak about this.

"I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady’s dearer to me than anything.
Well, it’s not for us to judge. And, to be sure, there seems so much
love..."

Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop to
Annushka’s gossip.

Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown. Dolly scrutinized that
simple gown attentively. She knew what it meant, and the price at which
such simplicity was obtained.

"An old friend," said Anna of Annushka.

Anna was not embarrassed now. She was perfectly composed and at ease.
Dolly saw that she had now completely recovered from the impression her
arrival had made on her, and had assumed that superficial, careless tone
which, as it were, closed the door on that compartment in which her
deeper feelings and ideas were kept.

"Well, Anna, and how is your little girl?" asked Dolly.

"Annie?" (This was what she called her little daughter Anna.) "Very
well. She has got on wonderfully. Would you like to see her? Come, I’ll
show her to you. We had a terrible bother," she began telling her, "over
nurses. We had an Italian wet-nurse. A good creature, but so stupid! We
wanted to get rid of her, but the baby is so used to her that we’ve gone
on keeping her still."

"But how have you managed?..." Dolly was beginning a question as to what
name the little girl would have; but noticing a sudden frown on Anna’s
face, she changed the drift of her question.

But Anna had understood.

"You didn’t mean to ask that? You meant to ask about her surname. Yes?
That worries Alexey. She has no name—that is, she’s a Karenina," said
Anna, dropping her eyelids till nothing could be seen but the eyelashes
meeting. "But we’ll talk about all that later," her face suddenly
brightening. "Come, I’ll show you her. _Elle est très gentille_. She
crawls now."

Hearing Anna’s voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a disagreeable
face and a dissolute expression walked in at the door, hurriedly shaking
her fair curls, and immediately began to defend herself though Anna had
not found fault with her. At every word Anna said, the English nurse
said hurriedly several times, "Yes, my lady."

But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the English
nurse, Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all. It was only on the
supposition that no good nurse would have entered so irregular a
household as Anna’s that Darya Alexandrovna could explain to herself how
Anna with her insight into people could take such an unprepossessing,
disreputable-looking woman as nurse to her child.

Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna saw at
once that Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no common existence,
and that the mother’s visit was something exceptional. Anna wanted to
get the baby her plaything, and could not find it.

Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many teeth the
baby had, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about the two last
teeth.

"I sometimes feel sorry I’m so superfluous here," said Anna, going out
of the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape the plaything
standing in the doorway. "It was very different with my first child."

"Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?" said Anna, screwing up
her eyes, as though looking at something far away. "But we’ll talk about
that later. You wouldn’t believe it, I’m like a hungry beggar woman when
a full dinner is set before her, and she does not know what to begin on
first. The dinner is you, and the talks I have before me with you, which
I could never have with anyone else; and I don’t know which subject to
begin upon first. _Mais je ne vous ferai grace de rien_. I must have
everything out with you."

"Here’s Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to see her," said
Anna, coming out with Darya Alexandrovna onto the stone terrace where
Princess Varvara was sitting in the shade at an embroidery frame,
working at a cover for Count Alexey Kirillovitch’s easy chair. "She says
she doesn’t want anything before dinner, but please order some lunch for
her, and I’ll go and look for Alexey and bring them all in."

Princess Varvara gave Dolly a cordial and rather patronizing reception,
and began at once explaining to her that she was living with Anna
because she had always cared more for her than her sister Katerina
Pavlovna, the aunt that had brought Anna up, and that now, when every
one had abandoned Anna, she thought it her duty to help her in this most
difficult period of transition.

Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the men of the
party in the billiard room, and returned with them to the terrace. There
was still a long time before the dinner-hour, it was exquisite weather,
and so several different methods of spending the next two hours were
proposed. There were very many methods of passing the time at
Vozdvizhenskoe, and these were all unlike those in use at Pokrovskoe.

"_Une partie de lawn-tennis,_" Veslovsky proposed, with his handsome
smile. "We’ll be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna."

"I imagine that what Dolly would like best would be a stroll—wouldn’t
you? And then the boat, perhaps," said Anna.

They walked along the path in two couples, Anna with Sviazhsky, and
Dolly with Vronsky. Dolly was a little embarrassed and anxious in the
new surroundings in which she found herself. Abstractly, theoretically,
she did not merely justify, she positively approved of Anna’s conduct.
As is indeed not unfrequent with women of unimpeachable virtue, weary of
the monotony of respectable existence, at a distance she not only
excused illicit love, she positively envied it. Besides, she loved Anna
with all her heart. But seeing Anna in actual life among these
strangers, with this fashionable tone that was so new to Darya
Alexandrovna, she felt ill at ease. What she disliked particularly was
seeing Princess Varvara ready to overlook everything for the sake of the
comforts she enjoyed.

As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of Anna’s action; but
to see the man for whose sake her action had been taken was disagreeable
to her. Moreover, she had never liked Vronsky. She thought him very
proud, and saw nothing in him of which he could be proud except his
wealth. But against her own will, here in his own house, he overawed her
more than ever, and she could not be at ease with him. She felt with him
the same feeling she had had with the maid about her dressing jacket.
Just as with the maid she had felt not exactly ashamed, but embarrassed
at her darns, so she felt with him not exactly ashamed, but embarrassed
at herself.

"If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not tired, indeed,
it’s not far. Shall we go?" he said, glancing into her face to convince
himself that she was not bored. "Are you coming, Anna?" he turned to
her.

"Yes, this is a monument he is setting up here," said Anna, turning to
Dolly with that sly smile of comprehension with which she had previously
talked about the hospital.

"By the autumn it will all be ready. Inside almost everything is done,"
said Anna.

"The front is still too low," he said to Anna, who had asked what was
the matter.

"I said the foundation ought to be raised," said Anna.

"Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna Arkadyevna," said
the architect, "but now it’s too late."

"Yes, I take a great interest in it," Anna answered Sviazhsky, who was
expressing his surprise at her knowledge of architecture. "This new
building ought to have been in harmony with the hospital. It was an
afterthought, and was begun without a plan."

"This way; let us go in here. Don’t go near the window," said Anna,
trying the paint to see if it were dry. "Alexey, the paint’s dry
already," she added.

Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything. She liked everything
very much, but most of all she liked Vronsky himself with his natural,
simple-hearted eagerness. "Yes, he’s a very nice, good man," she thought
several times, not hearing what he said, but looking at him and
penetrating into his expression, while she mentally put herself in
Anna’s place. She liked him so much just now with his eager interest
that she saw how Anna could be in love with him.

"No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don’t interest her,"
Vronsky said to Anna, who wanted to go on to the stables, where
Sviazhsky wished to see the new stallion. "You go on, while I escort the
princess home, and we’ll have a little talk," he said, "if you would
like that?" he added, turning to her.

She saw by Vronsky’s face that he wanted something from her. She was not
mistaken. As soon as they had passed through the little gate back into
the garden, he looked in the direction Anna had taken, and having made
sure that she could neither hear nor see them, he began:

"You guess that I have something I want to say to you," he said, looking
at her with laughing eyes. "I am not wrong in believing you to be a
friend of Anna’s." He took off his hat, and taking out his handkerchief,
wiped his head, which was growing bald.

The most diverse suppositions as to what he was about to speak of to her
flashed into her brain. "He is going to beg me to come to stay with them
with the children, and I shall have to refuse; or to create a set that
will receive Anna in Moscow.... Or isn’t it Vassenka Veslovsky and his
relations with Anna? Or perhaps about Kitty, that he feels he was to
blame?" All her conjectures were unpleasant, but she did not guess what
he really wanted to talk about to her.

"You have so much influence with Anna, she is so fond of you," he said;
"do help me."

"You have come to see us, you, the only woman of Anna’s former friends—I
don’t count Princess Varvara—but I know that you have done this not
because you regard our position as normal, but because, understanding
all the difficulty of the position, you still love her and want to be a
help to her. Have I understood you rightly?" he asked, looking round at
her.

"No," he broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the awkward position
into which he was putting his companion, he stopped abruptly, so that
she had to stop short too. "No one feels more deeply and intensely than
I do all the difficulty of Anna’s position; and that you may well
understand, if you do me the honor of supposing I have any heart. I am
to blame for that position, and that is why I feel it."

"Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna ... nor you miss society..."

"So far—and it may be so always—you are happy and at peace. I see in
Anna that she is happy, perfectly happy, she has had time to tell me so
much already," said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling; and involuntarily, as
she said this, at the same moment a doubt entered her mind whether Anna
really were happy.

"One day a son may be born, my son, and he will be legally a Karenin; he
will not be the heir of my name nor of my property, and however happy we
may be in our home life and however many children we may have, there
will be no real tie between us. They will be Karenins. You can
understand the bitterness and horror of this position! I have tried to
speak of this to Anna. It irritates her. She does not understand, and to
her I cannot speak plainly of all this. Now look at another side. I am
happy, happy in her love, but I must have occupation. I have found
occupation, and am proud of what I am doing and consider it nobler than
the pursuits of my former companions at court and in the army. And most
certainly I would not change the work I am doing for theirs. I am
working here, settled in my own place, and I am happy and contented, and
we need nothing more to make us happy. I love my work here. _Ce n’est
pas un pis-aller,_ on the contrary..."

Darya Alexandrovna noticed that at this point in his explanation he grew
confused, and she did not quite understand this digression, but she felt
that having once begun to speak of matters near his heart, of which he
could not speak to Anna, he was now making a clean breast of everything,
and that the question of his pursuits in the country fell into the same
category of matters near his heart, as the question of his relations
with Anna.

"Yes, indeed, I see that. But what can Anna do?" queried Darya
Alexandrovna.

"Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation," he said, calming
himself with an effort. "Anna can, it depends on her.... Even to
petition the Tsar for legitimization, a divorce is essential. And that
depends on Anna. Her husband agreed to a divorce—at that time your
husband had arranged it completely. And now, I know, he would not refuse
it. It is only a matter of writing to him. He said plainly at that time
that if she expressed the desire, he would not refuse. Of course," he
said gloomily, "it is one of those Pharisaical cruelties of which only
such heartless men are capable. He knows what agony any recollection of
him must give her, and knowing her, he must have a letter from her. I
can understand that it is agony to her. But the matter is of such
importance, that one must _passer pardessus toutes ces finesses de
sentiment. Il y va du bonheur et de l’existence d’Anne et de ses
enfants._ I won’t speak of myself, though it’s hard for me, very hard,"
he said, with an expression as though he were threatening someone for
its being hard for him. "And so it is, princess, that I am shamelessly
clutching at you as an anchor of salvation. Help me to persuade her to
write to him and ask for a divorce."

"Yes, of course," Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as she vividly
recalled her last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Yes, of
course," she repeated with decision, thinking of Anna.

"Very well, I will talk to her. But how is it she does not think of it
herself?" said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some reason she suddenly at
that point recalled Anna’s strange new habit of half-closing her eyes.
And she remembered that Anna drooped her eyelids just when the deeper
questions of life were touched upon. "Just as though she half-shut her
eyes to her own life, so as not to see everything," thought Dolly. "Yes,
indeed, for my own sake and for hers I will talk to her," Dolly said in
reply to his look of gratitude.

When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she looked intently in her
eyes, as though questioning her about the talk she had had with Vronsky,
but she made no inquiry in words.

"This is all I can do," she said with a smile to Anna, who came in to
her in a third dress, again of extreme simplicity.

A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and a
starched white cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the ladies
got up. Vronsky asked Sviazhsky to take in Anna Arkadyevna, and himself
offered his arm to Dolly. Veslovsky was before Tushkevitch in offering
his arm to Princess Varvara, so that Tushkevitch with the steward and
the doctor walked in alone.

The dinner, the dining room, the service, the waiting at table, the
wine, and the food, were not simply in keeping with the general tone of
modern luxury throughout all the house, but seemed even more sumptuous
and modern. Darya Alexandrovna watched this luxury which was novel to
her, and as a good housekeeper used to managing a household—although she
never dreamed of adapting anything she saw to her own household, as it
was all in a style of luxury far above her own manner of living—she
could not help scrutinizing every detail, and wondering how and by whom
it was all done. Vassenka Veslovsky, her husband, and even Sviazhsky,
and many other people she knew, would never have considered this
question, and would have readily believed what every well-bred host
tries to make his guests feel, that is, that all that is well-ordered in
his house has cost him, the host, no trouble whatever, but comes of
itself. Darya Alexandrovna was well aware that even porridge for the
children’s breakfast does not come of itself, and that therefore, where
so complicated and magnificent a style of luxury was maintained, someone
must give earnest attention to its organization. And from the glance
with which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the table, from the way he nodded
to the butler, and offered Darya Alexandrovna her choice between cold
soup and hot soup, she saw that it was all organized and maintained by
the care of the master of the house himself. It was evident that it all
rested no more upon Anna than upon Veslovsky. She, Sviazhsky, the
princess, and Veslovsky, were equally guests, with light hearts enjoying
what had been arranged for them.

Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation. The
conversation was a difficult one for the lady of the house at a small
table with persons present, like the steward and the architect,
belonging to a completely different world, struggling not to be overawed
by an elegance to which they were unaccustomed, and unable to sustain a
large share in the general conversation. But this difficult conversation
Anna directed with her usual tact and naturalness, and indeed she did so
with actual enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna observed. The conversation
began about the row Tushkevitch and Veslovsky had taken alone together
in the boat, and Tushkevitch began describing the last boat races in
Petersburg at the Yacht Club. But Anna, seizing the first pause, at once
turned to the architect to draw him out of his silence.

The conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the United
States, but Anna quickly brought it round to another topic, so as to
draw the steward into talk.

Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands covered with
rings, and began showing how the machine worked. It was clear that she
saw nothing would be understood from her explanation; but aware that her
talk was pleasant and her hands beautiful she went on explaining.

Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer. "Isn’t it true,
Karl Fedoritch, that it’s just like little scissors?" she said to the
steward.

_"Wünscht man Dochots, so hat man auch Klopots,"_ said Vassenka
Veslovsky, mimicking the German. _"J’adore l’allemand,"_ he addressed
Anna again with the same smile.

"What a pity!" said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of civility to
her domestic circle, she turned to her own friends.

"It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from your
description, Anna Arkadyevna," Sviazhsky said jestingly.

"Oh, no, why so?" said Anna with a smile that betrayed that she knew
there was something charming in her disquisitions upon the machine that
had been noticed by Sviazhsky. This new trait of girlish coquettishness
made an unpleasant impression on Dolly.

"But Anna Arkadyevna’s knowledge of architecture is marvelous," said
Tushkevitch.

"To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about plinths and
damp-courses," said Veslovsky. "Have I got it right?"

"There’s nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears so much of
it," said Anna. "But, I dare say, you don’t even know what houses are
made of?"

Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery that
existed between her and Veslovsky, but fell in with it against her will.

"Turkish views, in general," Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with a
smile.

"I rather agree with your beau-frère," said Anna, "though not quite on
the same ground as he," she added with a smile. "I’m afraid that we have
too many of these public duties in these latter days. Just as in old
days there were so many government functionaries that one had to call in
a functionary for every single thing, so now everyone’s doing some sort
of public duty. Alexey has been here now six months, and he’s a member,
I do believe, of five or six different public bodies. _Du train que cela
va,_ the whole time will be wasted on it. And I’m afraid that with such
a multiplicity of these bodies, they’ll end in being a mere form. How
many are you a member of, Nikolay Ivanitch?" she turned to
Sviazhsky—"over twenty, I fancy."

Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in her tone. Darya
Alexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky attentively, detected it
instantly. She noticed, too, that as she spoke Vronsky’s face had
immediately taken a serious and obstinate expression. Noticing this, and
that Princess Varvara at once made haste to change the conversation by
talking of Petersburg acquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky had
without apparent connection said in the garden of his work in the
country, Dolly surmised that this question of public activity was
connected with some deep private disagreement between Anna and Vronsky.

During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying herself. She did not
like the light tone of raillery that was kept up all the time between
Vassenka Veslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness altogether of
grown-up people, all alone without children, playing at a child’s game.
But to avoid breaking up the party and to get through the time somehow,
after a rest she joined the game again, and pretended to be enjoying it.
All that day it seemed to her as though she were acting in a theater
with actors cleverer than she, and that her bad acting was spoiling the
whole performance. She had come with the intention of staying two days,
if all went well. But in the evening, during the game, she made up her
mind that she would go home next day. The maternal cares and worries,
which she had so hated on the way, now, after a day spent without them,
struck her in quite another light, and tempted her back to them.

It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna was coming to
see her immediately. She longed to be alone with her own thoughts.

Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to see her, attired for
the night. In the course of the day Anna had several times begun to
speak of matters near her heart, and every time after a few words she
had stopped: "Afterwards, by ourselves, we’ll talk about everything.
I’ve got so much I want to tell you," she said.

Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk about.
She sat in the window looking at Dolly, and going over in her own mind
all the stores of intimate talk which had seemed so inexhaustible
beforehand, and she found nothing. At that moment it seemed to her that
everything had been said already.

"Yes, yes," said Anna, turning away and looking out of the open window.
"But I was not to blame. And who is to blame? What’s the meaning of
being to blame? Could it have been otherwise? What do you think? Could
it possibly have happened that you didn’t become the wife of Stiva?"

"With Alexey," said Anna, "I know what you talked about. But I wanted to
ask you directly what you think of me, of my life?"

"Divorce, you mean?" said Anna. "Do you know, the only woman who came to
see me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya? You know her, of course? _Au
fond, c’est la femme la plus depraveé qui existe._ She had an intrigue
with Tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in the basest way. And she told
me that she did not care to know me so long as my position was
irregular. Don’t imagine I would compare ... I know you, darling. But I
could not help remembering.... Well, so what did he say to you?" she
repeated.

"What children?" Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half closing her
eyes.

"I shall not, because I don’t wish it." And, in spite of all her
emotion, Anna smiled, as she caught the naïve expression of curiosity,
wonder, and horror on Dolly’s face.

This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of one or
two children, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible to her,
aroused so many ideas, reflections, and contradictory emotions, that she
had nothing to say, and simply gazed with wide-open eyes of wonder at
Anna. This was the very thing she had been dreaming of, but now learning
that it was possible, she was horrified. She felt that it was too simple
a solution of too complicated a problem.

"Why so? Think, I have a choice between two alternatives: either to be
with child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and companion of my
husband—practically my husband," Anna said in a tone intentionally
superficial and frivolous.

"For you, for other people," said Anna, as though divining her thoughts,
"there may be reason to hesitate; but for me.... You must consider, I am
not his wife; he loves me as long as he loves me. And how am I to keep
his love? Not like this!"

She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist with extraordinary
rapidity, as happens during moments of excitement; ideas and memories
rushed into Darya Alexandrovna’s head. "I," she thought, "did not keep
my attraction for Stiva; he left me for others, and the first woman for
whom he betrayed me did not keep him by being always pretty and lively.
He deserted her and took another. And can Anna attract and keep Count
Vronsky in that way? If that is what he looks for, he will find dresses
and manners still more attractive and charming. And however white and
beautiful her bare arms are, however beautiful her full figure and her
eager face under her black curls, he will find something better still,
just as my disgusting, pitiful, and charming husband does."

Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed. Anna noticed this sigh,
indicating dissent, and she went on. In her armory she had other
arguments so strong that no answer could be made to them.

"But that is just why a divorce is necessary." But Anna did not hear
her. She longed to give utterance to all the arguments with which she
had so many times convinced herself.

"Yes, but you mustn’t forget that you and I.... And besides that," added
Anna, in spite of the wealth of her arguments and the poverty of Dolly’s
objections, seeming still to admit that it was not right, "don’t forget
the chief point, that I am not now in the same position as you. For you
the question is: do you desire not to have any more children; while for
me it is: do I desire to have them? And that’s a great difference. You
must see that I can’t desire it in my position."

Darya Alexandrovna made no reply. She suddenly felt that she had got far
away from Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of questions on
which they could never agree, and about which it was better not to
speak.

"Yes, if possible," said Anna, speaking all at once in an utterly
different tone, subdued and mournful.

"Oh, we won’t then," Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say, noticing the
expression of suffering on Anna’s face. "All I see is that you take too
gloomy a view of things."

Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned her head, following
Anna with a face of sympathetic suffering.

"Suppose I make the attempt. What does it mean?" she said, evidently
giving utterance to a thought, a thousand times thought over and learned
by heart. "It means that I, hating him, but still recognizing that I
have wronged him—and I consider him magnanimous—that I humiliate myself
to write to him.... Well, suppose I make the effort; I do it. Either I
receive a humiliating refusal or consent.... Well, I have received his
consent, say..." Anna was at that moment at the furthest end of the
room, and she stopped there, doing something to the curtain at the
window. "I receive his consent, but my ... my son? They won’t give him
up to me. He will grow up despising me, with his father, whom I’ve
abandoned. Do you see, I love ... equally, I think, but both more than
myself—two creatures, Seryozha and Alexey."

Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna said her prayers and went to bed. She had
felt for Anna with all her heart while she was speaking to her, but now
she could not force herself to think of her. The memories of home and of
her children rose up in her imagination with a peculiar charm quite new
to her, with a sort of new brilliance. That world of her own seemed to
her now so sweet and precious that she would not on any account spend an
extra day outside it, and she made up her mind that she would certainly
go back next day.

Anna meantime went back to her boudoir, took a wine glass and dropped
into it several drops of a medicine, of which the principal ingredient
was morphine. After drinking it off and sitting still a little while,
she went into her bedroom in a soothed and more cheerful frame of mind.

He took Anna’s hand and looked inquiringly into her eyes.

Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Princess Varvara and the
gentlemen of the party. After a day spent together, both she and her
hosts were distinctly aware that they did not get on together, and that
it was better for them not to meet. Only Anna was sad. She knew that
now, from Dolly’s departure, no one again would stir up within her soul
the feelings that had been roused by their conversation. It hurt her to
stir up these feelings, but yet she knew that that was the best part of
her soul, and that that part of her soul would quickly be smothered in
the life she was leading.

"One has to know Anna and Vronsky—I have got to know him better now—to
see how nice they are, and how touching," she said, speaking now with
perfect sincerity, and forgetting the vague feeling of dissatisfaction
and awkwardness she had experienced there.

Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of the winter in the
country, living in just the same condition, and still taking no steps to
obtain a divorce. It was an understood thing between them that they
should not go away anywhere; but both felt, the longer they lived alone,
especially in the autumn, without guests in the house, that they could
not stand this existence, and that they would have to alter it.

Their life was apparently such that nothing better could be desired.
They had the fullest abundance of everything; they had a child, and both
had occupation. Anna devoted just as much care to her appearance when
they had no visitors, and she did a great deal of reading, both of
novels and of what serious literature was in fashion. She ordered all
the books that were praised in the foreign papers and reviews she
received, and read them with that concentrated attention which is only
given to what is read in seclusion. Moreover, every subject that was of
interest to Vronsky, she studied in books and special journals, so that
he often went straight to her with questions relating to agriculture or
architecture, sometimes even with questions relating to horse-breeding
or sport. He was amazed at her knowledge, her memory, and at first was
disposed to doubt it, to ask for confirmation of her facts; and she
would find what he asked for in some book, and show it to him.

These elections were attracting public attention from several
circumstances connected with them, and also from the people taking part
in them. There had been a great deal of talk about them, and great
preparations were being made for them. Persons who never attended the
elections were coming from Moscow, from Petersburg, and from abroad to
attend these. Vronsky had long before promised Sviazhsky to go to them.
Before the elections Sviazhsky, who often visited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove
over to fetch Vronsky. On the day before there had been almost a quarrel
between Vronsky and Anna over this proposed expedition. It was the very
dullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in the country, and so,
preparing himself for a struggle, Vronsky, with a hard and cold
expression, informed Anna of his departure as he had never spoken to her
before. But, to his surprise, Anna accepted the information with great
composure, and merely asked when he would be back. He looked intently at
her, at a loss to explain this composure. She smiled at his look. He
knew that way she had of withdrawing into herself, and knew that it only
happened when she had determined upon something without letting him know
her plans. He was afraid of this; but he was so anxious to avoid a scene
that he kept up appearances, and half sincerely believed in what he
longed to believe in—her reasonableness.

"I hope not," said Anna. "I got a box of books yesterday from Gautier’s.
No, I shan’t be dull."

Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he was bored in the
country and wanted to show Anna his right to independence, and also to
repay Sviazhsky by his support at the election for all the trouble he
had taken for Vronsky at the district council election, but chiefly in
order strictly to perform all those duties of a nobleman and landowner
which he had taken upon himself. But he had not in the least expected
that the election would so interest him, so keenly excite him, and that
he would be so good at this kind of thing. He was quite a new man in the
circle of the nobility of the province, but his success was
unmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that he had already
obtained a certain influence. This influence was due to his wealth and
reputation, the capital house in the town lent him by his old friend
Shirkov, who had a post in the department of finances and was director
of a flourishing bank in Kashin; the excellent cook Vronsky had brought
from the country, and his friendship with the governor, who was a
schoolfellow of Vronsky’s—a schoolfellow he had patronized and protected
indeed. But what contributed more than all to his success was his
direct, equable manner with everyone, which very quickly made the
majority of the noblemen reverse the current opinion of his supposed
haughtiness. He was himself conscious that, except that whimsical
gentleman married to Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, who had _à propos de bottes_
poured out a stream of irrelevant absurdities with such spiteful fury,
every nobleman with whom he had made acquaintance had become his
adherent. He saw clearly, and other people recognized it, too, that he
had done a great deal to secure the success of Nevyedovsky. And now at
his own table, celebrating Nevyedovsky’s election, he was experiencing
an agreeable sense of triumph over the success of his candidate. The
election itself had so fascinated him that, if he could succeed in
getting married during the next three years, he began to think of
standing himself—much as after winning a race ridden by a jockey, he had
longed to ride a race himself.

The letter was from Anna. Before he read the letter, he knew its
contents. Expecting the elections to be over in five days, he had
promised to be back on Friday. Today was Saturday, and he knew that the
letter contained reproaches for not being back at the time fixed. The
letter he had sent the previous evening had probably not reached her
yet.

Before Vronsky’s departure for the elections, Anna had reflected that
the scenes constantly repeated between them each time he left home,
might only make him cold to her instead of attaching him to her, and
resolved to do all she could to control herself so as to bear the
parting with composure. But the cold, severe glance with which he had
looked at her when he came to tell her he was going had wounded her, and
before he had started her peace of mind was destroyed.

Walks, conversation with Princess Varvara, visits to the hospital, and,
most of all, reading—reading of one book after another—filled up her
time. But on the sixth day, when the coachman came back without him, she
felt that now she was utterly incapable of stifling the thought of him
and of what he was doing there, just at that time her little girl was
taken ill. Anna began to look after her, but even that did not distract
her mind, especially as the illness was not serious. However hard she
tried, she could not love this little child, and to feign love was
beyond her powers. Towards the evening of that day, still alone, Anna
was in such a panic about him that she decided to start for the town,
but on second thoughts wrote him the contradictory letter that Vronsky
received, and without reading it through, sent it off by a special
messenger. The next morning she received his letter and regretted her
own. She dreaded a repetition of the severe look he had flung at her at
parting, especially when he knew that the baby was not dangerously ill.
But still she was glad she had written to him. At this moment Anna was
positively admitting to herself that she was a burden to him, that he
would relinquish his freedom regretfully to return to her, and in spite
of that she was glad he was coming. Let him weary of her, but he would
be here with her, so that she would see him, would know of every action
he took.

She was sitting in the drawing room near a lamp, with a new volume of
Taine, and as she read, listening to the sound of the wind outside, and
every minute expecting the carriage to arrive. Several times she had
fancied she heard the sound of wheels, but she had been mistaken. At
last she heard not the sound of wheels, but the coachman’s shout and the
dull rumble in the covered entry. Even Princess Varvara, playing
patience, confirmed this, and Anna, flushing hotly, got up; but instead
of going down, as she had done twice before, she stood still. She
suddenly felt ashamed of her duplicity, but even more she dreaded how he
might meet her. All feeling of wounded pride had passed now; she was
only afraid of the expression of his displeasure. She remembered that
her child had been perfectly well again for the last two days. She felt
positively vexed with her for getting better from the very moment her
letter was sent off. Then she thought of him, that he was here, all of
him, with his hands, his eyes. She heard his voice. And forgetting
everything, she ran joyfully to meet him.

"Well, how is Annie?" he said timidly from below, looking up to Anna as
she ran down to him.

The evening was spent happily and gaily in the presence of Princess
Varvara, who complained to him that Anna had been taking morphine in his
absence.

He told her about the election, and Anna knew how by adroit questions to
bring him to what gave him most pleasure—his own success. She told him
of everything that interested him at home; and all that she told him was
of the most cheerful description.

But late in the evening, when they were alone, Anna, seeing that she had
regained complete possession of him, wanted to erase the painful
impression of the glance he had given her for her letter. She said:

"I only meant to say that matters of real importance may turn up. Now,
for instance, I shall have to go to Moscow to arrange about the
house.... Oh, Anna, why are you so irritable? Don’t you know that I
can’t live without you?"

"If so," said Anna, her voice suddenly changing, "it means that you are
sick of this life.... Yes, you will come for a day and go away, as men
do..."

"Anna, that’s cruel. I am ready to give up my whole life."

Anna wrote to her husband asking him about a divorce, and towards the
end of November, taking leave of Princess Varvara, who wanted to go to
Petersburg, she went with Vronsky to Moscow. Expecting every day an
answer from Alexey Alexandrovitch, and after that the divorce, they now
established themselves together like married people.

"Do you know, he has never met Anna?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Vronsky. "And I want above everything to take him to see her. Let us go,
Levin!"

"Well, let us go to Anna’s, then. At once? Eh? She is at home. I
promised her long ago to bring you. Where were you meaning to spend the
evening?"

"Oblonsky’s carriage!" the porter shouted in an angry bass. The carriage
drove up and both got in. It was only for the first few moments, while
the carriage was driving out of the clubhouse gates, that Levin was
still under the influence of the club atmosphere of repose, comfort, and
unimpeachable good form. But as soon as the carriage drove out into the
street, and he felt it jolting over the uneven road, heard the angry
shout of a sledge driver coming towards them, saw in the uncertain light
the red blind of a tavern and the shops, this impression was dissipated,
and he began to think over his actions, and to wonder whether he was
doing right in going to see Anna. What would Kitty say? But Stepan
Arkadyevitch gave him no time for reflection, and, as though divining
his doubts, he scattered them.

Looking at himself in the glass, Levin noticed that he was red in the
face, but he felt certain he was not drunk, and he followed Stepan
Arkadyevitch up the carpeted stairs. At the top Stepan Arkadyevitch
inquired of the footman, who bowed to him as to an intimate friend, who
was with Anna Arkadyevna, and received the answer that it was M.
Vorkuev.

Passing through the dining room, a room not very large, with dark,
paneled walls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin walked over the soft carpet
to the half-dark study, lighted up by a single lamp with a big dark
shade. Another lamp with a reflector was hanging on the wall, lighting
up a big full-length portrait of a woman, which Levin could not help
looking at. It was the portrait of Anna, painted in Italy by Mihailov.
While Stepan Arkadyevitch went behind the _treillage_, and the man’s
voice which had been speaking paused, Levin gazed at the portrait, which
stood out from the frame in the brilliant light thrown on it, and he
could not tear himself away from it. He positively forgot where he was,
and not even hearing what was said, he could not take his eyes off the
marvelous portrait. It was not a picture, but a living, charming woman,
with black curling hair, with bare arms and shoulders, with a pensive
smile on the lips, covered with soft down; triumphantly and softly she
looked at him with eyes that baffled him. She was not living only
because she was more beautiful than a living woman can be.

"I am delighted!" He heard suddenly near him a voice, unmistakably
addressing him, the voice of the very woman he had been admiring in the
portrait. Anna had come from behind the treillage to meet him, and Levin
saw in the dim light of the study the very woman of the portrait, in a
dark blue shot gown, not in the same position nor with the same
expression, but with the same perfection of beauty which the artist had
caught in the portrait. She was less dazzling in reality, but, on the
other hand, there was something fresh and seductive in the living woman
which was not in the portrait.

Levin looked from the portrait to the original. A peculiar brilliance
lighted up Anna’s face when she felt his eyes on her. Levin flushed, and
to cover his confusion would have asked whether she had seen Darya
Alexandrovna lately; but at that moment Anna spoke. "We were just
talking, Ivan Petrovitch and I, of Vashtchenkov’s last pictures. Have
you seen them?"

Anna talked not merely naturally and cleverly, but cleverly and
carelessly, attaching no value to her own ideas and giving great weight
to the ideas of the person she was talking to.

Never had anything clever said by Levin given him so much pleasure as
this remark. Anna’s face lighted up at once, as at once she appreciated
the thought. She laughed.

"I was just telling Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, "that if she were to
put a hundredth part of the energy she devotes to this English girl to
the public question of the education of Russian children, she would be
doing a great and useful work."

"Give it to me, Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, indicating the book.
"It’s well worth taking up."

She asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing room, while she
stayed behind to say a few words to her brother. "About her divorce,
about Vronsky, and what he’s doing at the club, about me?" wondered
Levin. And he was so keenly interested by the question of what she was
saying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that he scarcely heard what Vorkuev was
telling him of the qualities of the story for children Anna Arkadyevna
had written.

Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase in their
conversation with her, and recalling the minutest changes in her
expression, entering more and more into her position, and feeling
sympathy for her, Levin reached home.

"Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can’t get more," Levin
decided the first question, which had always before seemed such a
weighty one, with extraordinary facility on the spot. "It’s
extraordinary how all one’s time is taken up here," he thought,
considering the second letter. He felt himself to blame for not having
got done what his sister had asked him to do for her. "Today, again,
I’ve not been to the court, but today I’ve certainly not had time." And
resolving that he would not fail to do it next day, he went up to his
wife. As he went in, Levin rapidly ran through mentally the day he had
spent. All the events of the day were conversations, conversations he
had heard and taken part in. All the conversations were upon subjects
which, if he had been alone at home, he would never have taken up, but
here they were very interesting. And all these conversations were right
enough, only in two places there was something not quite right. One was
what he had said about the carp, the other was something not "quite the
thing" in the tender sympathy he was feeling for Anna.

"Well, I’m very glad I met Vronsky. I felt quite at ease and natural
with him. You understand, I shall try not to see him, but I’m glad that
this awkwardness is all over," he said, and remembering that by way of
trying not to see him, he had immediately gone to call on Anna, he
blushed. "We talk about the peasants drinking; I don’t know which drinks
most, the peasantry or our own class; the peasants do on holidays,
but..."

"Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna Arkadyevna."

And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his doubts as to
whether he had done right in going to see Anna were settled once for
all. He knew now that he ought not to have done so.

Kitty’s eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna’s name, but
controlling herself with an effort, she concealed her emotion and
deceived him.

"She is a very sweet, very, very unhappy, good woman," he said, telling
her about Anna, her occupations, and what she had told him to say to
her.

It was a long while before Levin could soothe his wife. At last he
succeeded in calming her, only by confessing that a feeling of pity, in
conjunction with the wine he had drunk, had been too much for him, that
he had succumbed to Anna’s artful influence, and that he would avoid
her. One thing he did with more sincerity confess to was that living so
long in Moscow, a life of nothing but conversation, eating and drinking,
he was degenerating. They talked till three o’clock in the morning. Only
at three o’clock were they sufficiently reconciled to be able to go to
sleep.

After taking leave of her guests, Anna did not sit down, but began
walking up and down the room. She had unconsciously the whole evening
done her utmost to arouse in Levin a feeling of love—as of late she had
fallen into doing with all young men—and she knew she had attained her
aim, as far as was possible in one evening, with a married and
conscientious man. She liked him indeed extremely, and, in spite of the
striking difference, from the masculine point of view, between Vronsky
and Levin, as a woman she saw something they had in common, which had
made Kitty able to love both. Yet as soon as he was out of the room, she
ceased to think of him.

"In the first place, I did not ask him to give you any message; and
secondly, I never tell lies. But what’s the chief point, I wanted to
stay, and I stayed," he said, frowning. "Anna, what is it for, why will
you?" he said after a moment’s silence, bending over towards her, and he
opened his hand, hoping she would lay hers in it.

"Come, tell me what I ought to do to give you peace of mind? I am ready
to do anything to make you happy," he said, touched by her expression of
despair; "what wouldn’t I do to save you from distress of any sort, as
now, Anna!" he said.

The appointment yielded an income of from seven to ten thousand a year,
and Oblonsky could fill it without giving up his government position. It
was in the hands of two ministers, one lady, and two Jews, and all these
people, though the way had been paved already with them, Stepan
Arkadyevitch had to see in Petersburg. Besides this business, Stepan
Arkadyevitch had promised his sister Anna to obtain from Karenin a
definite answer on the question of divorce. And begging fifty roubles
from Dolly, he set off for Petersburg.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin’s study listening to his report on
the causes of the unsatisfactory position of Russian finance, and only
waiting for the moment when he would finish to speak about his own
business or about Anna.

"Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what it is.
About Anna," Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a brief space, and
shaking off the unpleasant impression.

As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna’s name, the face of Alexey
Alexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone out of
it, and it looked weary and dead.

"I had imagined," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher, almost
shrill voice, "that Anna Arkadyevna had everything she had desired for
herself."

"But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it a
condition to leave me my son. I replied in that sense, and supposed that
the matter was ended. I consider it at an end," shrieked Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me," Alexey
Alexandrovitch put in, lifting his eyebrows.

"The promise was given before. And I had supposed that the question of
my son had settled the matter. Besides, I had hoped that Anna Arkadyevna
had enough generosity..." Alexey Alexandrovitch articulated with
difficulty, his lips twitching and his face white.

"Ah, Seryozha!" he said aloud. "Sergey Alexyevitch! I thought it was the
director of a department. Anna asked me to see him too," he thought.

And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had said
to him at parting: "Anyway, you will see him. Find out exactly where he
is, who is looking after him. And Stiva ... if it were possible! Could
it be possible?" Stepan Arkadyevitch knew what was meant by that "if it
were possible,"—if it were possible to arrange the divorce so as to let
her have her son.... Stepan Arkadyevitch saw now that it was no good to
dream of that, but still he was glad to see his nephew.

"Yes, that must be a serious matter," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, watching
with mournful interest the eager eyes, like his mother’s; not childish
now—no longer fully innocent. And though he had promised Alexey
Alexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, he could not restrain himself.

Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer, refusing
to grant Anna’s divorce, and he understood that this decision was based
on what the Frenchman had said in his real or pretended trance.

Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the heat and
dust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare of summer, and
all the trees in the boulevards had long since been in full leaf, and
the leaves were covered with dust. But they did not go back to
Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to do long before; they went on
staying in Moscow, though they both loathed it, because of late there
had been no agreement between them.

And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and found
grounds for indignation in everything. For everything that was difficult
in her position she blamed him. The agonizing condition of suspense she
had passed in Moscow, the tardiness and indecision of Alexey
Alexandrovitch, her solitude—she put it all down to him. If he had loved
her he would have seen all the bitterness of her position, and would
have rescued her from it. For her being in Moscow and not in the
country, he was to blame too. He could not live buried in the country as
she would have liked to do. He must have society, and he had put her in
this awful position, the bitterness of which he would not see. And
again, it was his fault that she was forever separated from her son.

It was dusk. Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back from a
bachelor dinner. She walked up and down in his study (the room where the
noise from the street was least heard), and thought over every detail of
their yesterday’s quarrel. Going back from the well-remembered,
offensive words of the quarrel to what had been the ground of it, she
arrived at last at its origin. For a long while she could hardly believe
that their dissension had arisen from a conversation so inoffensive, of
so little moment to either. But so it actually had been. It all arose
from his laughing at the girls’ high schools, declaring they were
useless, while she defended them. He had spoken slightingly of women’s
education in general, and had said that Hannah, Anna’s English protegée,
had not the slightest need to know anything of physics.

This irritated Anna. She saw in this a contemptuous reference to her
occupations. And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him back for the
pain he had given her. "I don’t expect you to understand me, my
feelings, as anyone who loved me might, but simple delicacy I did
expect," she said.

"How? did she swim?" asked Anna, frowning.

"What an absurd fancy! Why, did she swim in some special way, then?"
said Anna, not answering.

Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some unpleasant idea.

"Yes ... oh, no, wait a minute! The day after tomorrow’s Sunday, I have
to be at maman’s," said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as soon as he
uttered his mother’s name he was aware of her intent, suspicious eyes.
His embarrassment confirmed her suspicion. She flushed hotly and drew
away from him. It was now not the Queen of Sweden’s swimming-mistress
who filled Anna’s imagination, but the young Princess Sorokina. She was
staying in a village near Moscow with Countess Vronskaya.

"Anna, we’ll go the day after tomorrow, if you like. I agree to
everything."

"Anna, why distress yourself and me so?" he said to her, kissing her
hands. There was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied she caught
the sound of tears in his voice, and she felt them wet on her hand. And
instantly Anna’s despairing jealousy changed to a despairing passion of
tenderness. She put her arms round him, and covered with kisses his
head, his neck, his hands.

Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly to work
in the morning preparing for their departure. Though it was not settled
whether they should go on Monday or Tuesday, as they had each given way
to the other, Anna packed busily, feeling absolutely indifferent whether
they went a day earlier or later. She was standing in her room over an
open box, taking things out of it, when he came in to see her earlier
than usual, dressed to go out.

With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what Vronsky had
told her. At the end was added: "Little hope; but I will do everything
possible and impossible."

"Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother."

"Must decide, and I have decided," she said, and she would have gone
away, but at that moment Yashvin walked into the room. Anna greeted him
and remained.

"But now it’s quite decided," said Anna, looking Vronsky straight in the
face with a look which told him not to dream of the possibility of
reconciliation.

"I’ve never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whether I’m
sorry for him or not. You see, all my fortune’s here"—he touched his
breast pocket—"and just now I’m a wealthy man. But today I’m going to
the club, and I may come out a beggar. You see, whoever sits down to
play with me—he wants to leave me without a shirt to my back, and so do
I him. And so we fight it out, and that’s the pleasure of it."

"Well, but suppose you were married," said Anna, "how would it be for
your wife?"

"And Helsingfors?" said Vronsky, entering into the conversation and
glancing at Anna’s smiling face. Meeting his eyes, Anna’s face instantly
took a coldly severe expression as though she were saying to him: "It’s
not forgotten. It’s all the same."

Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in. Anna got up and went out of
the room.

"Eh, Anna?" he queried.

"Oh, nothing, _tant pis_ then," he thought, feeling cold again, and he
turned and went out. As he was going out he caught a glimpse in the
looking glass of her face, white, with quivering lips. He even wanted to
stop and to say some comforting word to her, but his legs carried him
out of the room before he could think what to say. The whole of that day
he spent away from home, and when he came in late in the evening the
maid told him that Anna Arkadyevna had a headache and begged him not to
go in to her.

And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied, too, the
words that he had unmistakably wished to say and could have said to her,
and she grew more and more exasperated.

All that day, except for the visit to Wilson’s, which occupied two
hours, Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or whether
there were still hope of reconciliation, whether she should go away at
once or see him once more. She was expecting him the whole day, and in
the evening, as she went to her own room, leaving a message for him that
her head ached, she said to herself, "If he comes in spite of what the
maid says, it means that he loves me still. If not, it means that all is
over, and then I will decide what I’m to do!..."

"There was a quarrel. Just what has happened several times. I said I had
a headache, and he did not come in to see me. Tomorrow we’re going away;
I must see him and get ready for the journey," she said to herself. And
learning that he was in his study, she went down to him. As she passed
through the drawing room she heard a carriage stop at the entrance, and
looking out of the window she saw the carriage, from which a young girl
in a lilac hat was leaning out giving some direction to the footman
ringing the bell. After a parley in the hall, someone came upstairs, and
Vronsky’s steps could be heard passing the drawing room. He went rapidly
downstairs. Anna went again to the window. She saw him come out onto the
steps without his hat and go up to the carriage. The young girl in the
lilac hat handed him a parcel. Vronsky, smiling, said something to her.
The carriage drove away, he ran rapidly upstairs again.

"Anna, we can’t go on like this..."

"He has gone! It is over!" Anna said to herself, standing at the window;
and in answer to this statement the impression of the darkness when the
candle had flickered out, and of her fearful dream mingling into one,
filled her heart with cold terror.

"Why, this isn’t it, this isn’t he! Where are his blue eyes, his sweet,
shy smile?" was her first thought when she saw her chubby, rosy little
girl with her black, curly hair instead of Seryozha, whom in the tangle
of her ideas she had expected to see in the nursery. The little girl
sitting at the table was obstinately and violently battering on it with
a cork, and staring aimlessly at her mother with her pitch-black eyes.
Answering the English nurse that she was quite well, and that she was
going to the country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the little girl and
began spinning the cork to show her. But the child’s loud, ringing
laugh, and the motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so vividly that
she got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs, and went away. "Can it be
all over? No, it cannot be!" she thought. "He will come back. But how
can he explain that smile, that excitement after he had been talking to
her? But even if he doesn’t explain, I will believe. If I don’t believe,
there’s only one thing left for me, and I can’t."

"Annushka, dear, what am I to do?" said Anna, sobbing and sinking
helplessly into a chair.

"Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna? Why, there’s nothing out of the
way. You drive out a little, and it’ll cheer you up," said the maid.

"Yes, I’m going," said Anna, rousing herself and getting up. "And if
there’s a telegram while I’m away, send it on to Darya Alexandrovna’s
... but no, I shall be back myself."

As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly swayed
on its supple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in the midst of
the unceasing rattle of wheels and the changing impressions in the pure
air, Anna ran over the events of the last days, and she saw her position
quite differently from how it had seemed at home. Now the thought of
death seemed no longer so terrible and so clear to her, and death itself
no longer seemed so inevitable. Now she blamed herself for the
humiliation to which she had lowered herself. "I entreat him to forgive
me. I have given in to him. I have owned myself in fault. What for?
Can’t I live without him?" And leaving unanswered the question how she
was going to live without him, she fell to reading the signs on the
shops. "Office and warehouse. Dental surgeon. Yes, I’ll tell Dolly all
about it. She doesn’t like Vronsky. I shall be sick and ashamed, but
I’ll tell her. She loves me, and I’ll follow her advice. I won’t give in
to him; I won’t let him train me as he pleases. Filippov, bun shop. They
say they send their dough to Petersburg. The Moscow water is so good for
it. Ah, the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!"

Thinking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and mentally
working her heart up to great bitterness, Anna went upstairs.

"Kitty! Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!" thought Anna, "the girl
he thinks of with love. He’s sorry he didn’t marry her. But me he thinks
of with hatred, and is sorry he had anything to do with me."

The sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna called.
Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had interrupted their
conversation.

"We had a telegram too," answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.

"I haven’t, and indeed I don’t wish it," said Anna.

"What’s this? Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?" thought Anna
when she was alone. "Perhaps she’s right, too. But it’s not for her, the
girl who was in love with Vronsky, it’s not for her to show me that,
even if it is true. I know that in my position I can’t be received by
any decent woman. I knew that from the first moment I sacrificed
everything to him. And this is my reward! Oh, how I hate him! And what
did I come here for? I’m worse here, more miserable." She heard from the
next room the sisters’ voices in consultation. "And what am I going to
say to Dolly now? Amuse Kitty by the sight of my wretchedness, submit to
her patronizing? No; and besides, Dolly wouldn’t understand. And it
would be no good my telling her. It would only be interesting to see
Kitty, to show her how I despise everyone and everything, how nothing
matters to me now."

Dolly came in with the letter. Anna read it and handed it back in
silence.

"Oh, why so? On the contrary, I have hopes," said Dolly, looking
inquisitively at Anna. She had never seen her in such a strangely
irritable condition. "When are you going away?" she asked.

Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did not
answer.

Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but Dolly
persuaded her. Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked up to her,
blushing, and shook hands.

Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict between her
antagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be nice to her. But as
soon as she saw Anna’s lovely and attractive face, all feeling of
antagonism disappeared.

"I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet me. I’m
used to everything. You have been ill? Yes, you are changed," said Anna.

Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes. She ascribed
this hostility to the awkward position in which Anna, who had once
patronized her, must feel with her now, and she felt sorry for her.

They talked of Kitty’s illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was
obvious that nothing interested Anna.

But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.

"So good-bye, Dolly." And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with Kitty,
Anna went out hurriedly.

Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind than
when she set out from home. To her previous tortures was added now that
sense of mortification and of being an outcast which she had felt so
distinctly on meeting Kitty.

"Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he’s not there, then go
there and catch him." Anna looked at the railway timetable in the
newspapers. An evening train went at two minutes past eight. "Yes, I
shall be in time." She gave orders for the other horses to be put in the
carriage, and packed in a traveling-bag the things needed for a few
days. She knew she would never come back here again.

"Here it is again! Again I understand it all!" Anna said to herself, as
soon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly, rumbled over the
tiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one impression followed
rapidly upon another.

"Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?" she tried to
recall it. "‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur?_’—no, not that. Yes, of what Yashvin
says, the struggle for existence and hatred is the one thing that holds
men together. No, it’s a useless journey you’re making," she said,
mentally addressing a party in a coach and four, evidently going for an
excursion into the country. "And the dog you’re taking with you will be
no help to you. You can’t get away from yourselves." Turning her eyes in
the direction Pyotr had turned to look, she saw a factory hand almost
dead drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman. "Come,
he’s found a quicker way," she thought. "Count Vronsky and I did not
find that happiness either, though we expected so much from it." And now
for the first time Anna turned that glaring light in which she was
seeing everything on to her relations with him, which she had hitherto
avoided thinking about. "What was it he sought in me? Not love so much
as the satisfaction of vanity." She remembered his words, the expression
of his face, that recalled an abject setter-dog, in the early days of
their connection. And everything now confirmed this. "Yes, there was the
triumph of success in him. Of course there was love too, but the chief
element was the pride of success. He boasted of me. Now that’s over.
There’s nothing to be proud of. Not to be proud of, but to be ashamed
of. He has taken from me all he could, and now I am no use to him. He is
weary of me and is trying not to be dishonorable in his behavior to me.
He let that out yesterday—he wants divorce and marriage so as to burn
his ships. He loves me, but how? The zest is gone, as the English say.
That fellow wants everyone to admire him and is very much pleased with
himself," she thought, looking at a red-faced clerk, riding on a riding
school horse. "Yes, there’s not the same flavor about me for him now. If
I go away from him, at the bottom of his heart he will be glad."

A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and at the same time
careful of the impression they were making, hurried by. Pyotr, too,
crossed the room in his livery and top-boots, with his dull, animal
face, and came up to her to take her to the train. Some noisy men were
quiet as she passed them on the platform, and one whispered something
about her to another—something vile, no doubt. She stepped up on the
high step, and sat down in a carriage by herself on a dirty seat that
had been white. Her bag lay beside her, shaken up and down by the
springiness of the seat. With a foolish smile Pyotr raised his hat, with
its colored band, at the window, in token of farewell; an impudent
conductor slammed the door and the latch. A grotesque-looking lady
wearing a bustle (Anna mentally undressed the woman, and was appalled at
her hideousness), and a little girl laughing affectedly ran down the
platform.

"Even the child’s hideous and affected," thought Anna. To avoid seeing
anyone, she got up quickly and seated herself at the opposite window of
the empty carriage. A misshapen-looking peasant covered with dirt, in a
cap from which his tangled hair stuck out all round, passed by that
window, stooping down to the carriage wheels. "There’s something
familiar about that hideous peasant," thought Anna. And remembering her
dream, she moved away to the opposite door, shaking with terror. The
conductor opened the door and let in a man and his wife.

Anna made no answer. The conductor and her two fellow-passengers did not
notice under her veil her panic-stricken face. She went back to her
corner and sat down. The couple seated themselves on the opposite side,
and intently but surreptitiously scrutinized her clothes. Both husband
and wife seemed repulsive to Anna. The husband asked, would she allow
him to smoke, obviously not with a view to smoking but to getting into
conversation with her. Receiving her assent, he said to his wife in
French something about caring less to smoke than to talk. They made
inane and affected remarks to one another, entirely for her benefit.
Anna saw clearly that they were sick of each other, and hated each
other. And no one could have helped hating such miserable monstrosities.

A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage, noise,
shouting and laughter. It was so clear to Anna that there was nothing
for anyone to be glad of, that this laughter irritated her agonizingly,
and she would have liked to stop up her ears not to hear it. At last the
third bell rang, there was a whistle and a hiss of steam, and a clank of
chains, and the man in her carriage crossed himself. "It would be
interesting to ask him what meaning he attaches to that," thought Anna,
looking angrily at him. She looked past the lady out of the window at
the people who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the train or stood
on the platform. The train, jerking at regular intervals at the
junctions of the rails, rolled by the platform, past a stone wall, a
signal-box, past other trains; the wheels, moving more smoothly and
evenly, resounded with a slight clang on the rails. The window was
lighted up by the bright evening sun, and a slight breeze fluttered the
curtain. Anna forgot her fellow passengers, and to the light swaying of
the train she fell to thinking again, as she breathed the fresh air.

The words seemed an answer to Anna’s thoughts.

"To escape from what worries him," repeated Anna. And glancing at the
red-cheeked husband and the thin wife, she saw that the sickly wife
considered herself misunderstood, and the husband deceived her and
encouraged her in that idea of herself. Anna seemed to see all their
history and all the crannies of their souls, as it were turning a light
upon them. But there was nothing interesting in them, and she pursued
her thought.

When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd of
passengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers, she stood
on the platform, trying to think what she had come here for, and what
she meant to do. Everything that had seemed to her possible before was
now so difficult to consider, especially in this noisy crowd of hideous
people who would not leave her alone. One moment porters ran up to her
proffering their services, then young men, clacking their heels on the
planks of the platform and talking loudly, stared at her; people meeting
her dodged past on the wrong side. Remembering that she had meant to go
on further if there were no answer, she stopped a porter and asked if
her coachman were not here with a note from Count Vronsky.

