Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had long known that Levin was in love with his
sister-in-law, Kitty, gave a hardly perceptible smile, and his eyes
sparkled merrily.

"All right. I see," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I should ask you to come
to us, you know, but my wife’s not quite the thing. But I tell you what;
if you want to see them, they’re sure now to be at the Zoological
Gardens from four to five. Kitty skates. You drive along there, and I’ll
come and fetch you, and we’ll go and dine somewhere together."

The families of the Levins and the Shtcherbatskys were old, noble Moscow
families, and had always been on intimate and friendly terms. This
intimacy had grown still closer during Levin’s student days. He had both
prepared for the university with the young Prince Shtcherbatsky, the
brother of Kitty and Dolly, and had entered at the same time with him.
In those days Levin used often to be in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and
he was in love with the Shtcherbatsky household. Strange as it may
appear, it was with the household, the family, that Konstantin Levin was
in love, especially with the feminine half of the household. Levin did
not remember his own mother, and his only sister was older than he was,
so that it was in the Shtcherbatskys’ house that he saw for the first
time that inner life of an old, noble, cultivated, and honorable family
of which he had been deprived by the death of his father and mother. All
the members of that family, especially the feminine half, were pictured
by him, as it were, wrapped about with a mysterious poetical veil, and
he not only perceived no defects whatever in them, but under the
poetical veil that shrouded them he assumed the existence of the
loftiest sentiments and every possible perfection. Why it was the three
young ladies had one day to speak French, and the next English; why it
was that at certain hours they played by turns on the piano, the sounds
of which were audible in their brother’s room above, where the students
used to work; why they were visited by those professors of French
literature, of music, of drawing, of dancing; why at certain hours all
the three young ladies, with Mademoiselle Linon, drove in the coach to
the Tversky boulevard, dressed in their satin cloaks, Dolly in a long
one, Natalia in a half-long one, and Kitty in one so short that her
shapely legs in tightly-drawn red stockings were visible to all
beholders; why it was they had to walk about the Tversky boulevard
escorted by a footman with a gold cockade in his hat—all this and much
more that was done in their mysterious world he did not understand, but
he was sure that everything that was done there was very good, and he
was in love precisely with the mystery of the proceedings.

In his student days he had all but been in love with the eldest, Dolly,
but she was soon married to Oblonsky. Then he began being in love with
the second. He felt, as it were, that he had to be in love with one of
the sisters, only he could not quite make out which. But Natalia, too,
had hardly made her appearance in the world when she married the
diplomat Lvov. Kitty was still a child when Levin left the university.
Young Shtcherbatsky went into the navy, was drowned in the Baltic, and
Levin’s relations with the Shtcherbatskys, in spite of his friendship
with Oblonsky, became less intimate. But when early in the winter of
this year Levin came to Moscow, after a year in the country, and saw the
Shtcherbatskys, he realized which of the three sisters he was indeed
destined to love.

One would have thought that nothing could be simpler than for him, a man
of good family, rather rich than poor, and thirty-two years old, to make
the young Princess Shtcherbatskaya an offer of marriage; in all
likelihood he would at once have been looked upon as a good match. But
Levin was in love, and so it seemed to him that Kitty was so perfect in
every respect that she was a creature far above everything earthly; and
that he was a creature so low and so earthly that it could not even be
conceived that other people and she herself could regard him as worthy
of her.

After spending two months in Moscow in a state of enchantment, seeing
Kitty almost every day in society, into which he went so as to meet her,
he abruptly decided that it could not be, and went back to the country.

Levin’s conviction that it could not be was founded on the idea that in
the eyes of her family he was a disadvantageous and worthless match for
the charming Kitty, and that Kitty herself could not love him. In her
family’s eyes he had no ordinary, definite career and position in
society, while his contemporaries by this time, when he was thirty-two,
were already, one a colonel, and another a professor, another director
of a bank and railways, or president of a board like Oblonsky. But he
(he knew very well how he must appear to others) was a country
gentleman, occupied in breeding cattle, shooting game, and building
barns; in other words, a fellow of no ability, who had not turned out
well, and who was doing just what, according to the ideas of the world,
is done by people fit for nothing else.

The mysterious, enchanting Kitty herself could not love such an ugly
person as he conceived himself to be, and, above all, such an ordinary,
in no way striking person. Moreover, his attitude to Kitty in the
past—the attitude of a grown-up person to a child, arising from his
friendship with her brother—seemed to him yet another obstacle to love.
An ugly, good-natured man, as he considered himself, might, he supposed,
be liked as a friend; but to be loved with such a love as that with
which he loved Kitty, one would need to be a handsome and, still more, a
distinguished man.

After obtaining his brother’s address from Sergey Ivanovitch’s footman,
Levin was on the point of setting off at once to see him, but on second
thought he decided to put off his visit till the evening. The first
thing to do to set his heart at rest was to accomplish what he had come
to Moscow for. From his brother’s Levin went to Oblonsky’s office, and
on getting news of the Shtcherbatskys from him, he drove to the place
where he had been told he might find Kitty.

Nikolay Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in a short jacket and tight
trousers, was sitting on a garden seat with his skates on. Seeing Levin,
he shouted to him:

"Yes, you see we’re growing up," she said to him, glancing towards
Kitty, "and growing old. _Tiny bear_ has grown big now!" pursued the
Frenchwoman, laughing, and she reminded him of his joke about the three
young ladies whom he had compared to the three bears in the English
nursery tale. "Do you remember that’s what you used to call them?"

"Now, go and skate, go and skate. Our Kitty has learned to skate nicely,
hasn’t she?"

When Levin darted up to Kitty her face was no longer stern; her eyes
looked at him with the same sincerity and friendliness, but Levin
fancied that in her friendliness there was a certain note of deliberate
composure. And he felt depressed. After talking a little of her old
governess and her peculiarities, she questioned him about his life.

"Are you going to stay in town long?" Kitty questioned him.

"How splendid, how nice he is!" Kitty was thinking at that time, as she
came out of the pavilion with Mlle. Linon, and looked towards him with a
smile of quiet affection, as though he were a favorite brother. "And can
it be my fault, can I have done anything wrong? They talk of flirtation.
I know it’s not he that I love; but still I am happy with him, and he’s
so jolly. Only, why did he say that?..." she mused.

Catching sight of Kitty going away, and her mother meeting her at the
steps, Levin, flushed from his rapid exercise, stood still and pondered
a minute. He took off his skates, and overtook the mother and daughter
at the entrance of the gardens.

This stiffness hurt Kitty, and she could not resist the desire to smooth
over her mother’s coldness. She turned her head, and with a smile said:

The friends hardly spoke all the way. Levin was wondering what that
change in Kitty’s expression had meant, and alternately assuring himself
that there was hope, and falling into despair, seeing clearly that his
hopes were insane, and yet all the while he felt himself quite another
man, utterly unlike what he had been before her smile and those words,
"Good-bye till this evening."

When Levin went into the restaurant with Oblonsky, he could not help
noticing a certain peculiarity of expression, as it were, a restrained
radiance, about the face and whole figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Oblonsky took off his overcoat, and with his hat over one ear walked
into the dining room, giving directions to the Tatar waiters, who were
clustered about him in evening coats, bearing napkins. Bowing to right
and left to the people he met, and here as everywhere joyously greeting
acquaintances, he went up to the sideboard for a preliminary appetizer
of fish and vodka, and said to the painted Frenchwoman decked in
ribbons, lace, and ringlets, behind the counter, something so amusing
that even that Frenchwoman was moved to genuine laughter. Levin for his
part refrained from taking any vodka simply because he felt such a
loathing of that Frenchwoman, all made up, it seemed, of false hair,
_poudre de riz,_ and _vinaigre de toilette_. He made haste to move away
from her, as from a dirty place. His whole soul was filled with memories
of Kitty, and there was a smile of triumph and happiness shining in his
eyes.

"It’s not only that she likes you—she says that Kitty is certain to be
your wife."

"Well, he turned up here soon after you’d gone, and as I can see, he’s
over head and ears in love with Kitty, and you know that her mother..."

The young Princess Kitty Shtcherbatskaya was eighteen. It was the first
winter that she had been out in the world. Her success in society had
been greater than that of either of her elder sisters, and greater even
than her mother had anticipated. To say nothing of the young men who
danced at the Moscow balls being almost all in love with Kitty, two
serious suitors had already this first winter made their appearance:
Levin, and immediately after his departure, Count Vronsky.

Levin’s appearance at the beginning of the winter, his frequent visits,
and evident love for Kitty, had led to the first serious conversations
between Kitty’s parents as to her future, and to disputes between them.
The prince was on Levin’s side; he said he wished for nothing better for
Kitty. The princess for her part, going round the question in the manner
peculiar to women, maintained that Kitty was too young, that Levin had
done nothing to prove that he had serious intentions, that Kitty felt no
great attraction to him, and other side issues; but she did not state
the principal point, which was that she looked for a better match for
her daughter, and that Levin was not to her liking, and she did not
understand him. When Levin had abruptly departed, the princess was
delighted, and said to her husband triumphantly: "You see I was right."
When Vronsky appeared on the scene, she was still more delighted,
confirmed in her opinion that Kitty was to make not simply a good, but a
brilliant match.

In the mother’s eyes there could be no comparison between Vronsky and
Levin. She disliked in Levin his strange and uncompromising opinions and
his shyness in society, founded, as she supposed, on his pride and his
queer sort of life, as she considered it, absorbed in cattle and
peasants. She did not very much like it that he, who was in love with
her daughter, had kept coming to the house for six weeks, as though he
were waiting for something, inspecting, as though he were afraid he
might be doing them too great an honor by making an offer, and did not
realize that a man, who continually visits at a house where there is a
young unmarried girl, is bound to make his intentions clear. And
suddenly, without doing so, he disappeared. "It’s as well he’s not
attractive enough for Kitty to have fallen in love with him," thought
the mother.

Vronsky openly flirted with Kitty at balls, danced with her, and came
continually to the house, consequently there could be no doubt of the
seriousness of his intentions. But, in spite of that, the mother had
spent the whole of that winter in a state of terrible anxiety and
agitation.

Princess Shtcherbatskaya had herself been married thirty years ago, her
aunt arranging the match. Her husband, about whom everything was well
known before hand, had come, looked at his future bride, and been looked
at. The match-making aunt had ascertained and communicated their mutual
impression. That impression had been favorable. Afterwards, on a day
fixed beforehand, the expected offer was made to her parents, and
accepted. All had passed very simply and easily. So it seemed, at least,
to the princess. But over her own daughters she had felt how far from
simple and easy is the business, apparently so commonplace, of marrying
off one’s daughters. The panics that had been lived through, the
thoughts that had been brooded over, the money that had been wasted, and
the disputes with her husband over marrying the two elder girls, Darya
and Natalia! Now, since the youngest had come out, she was going through
the same terrors, the same doubts, and still more violent quarrels with
her husband than she had over the elder girls. The old prince, like all
fathers indeed, was exceedingly punctilious on the score of the honor
and reputation of his daughters. He was irrationally jealous over his
daughters, especially over Kitty, who was his favorite. At every turn he
had scenes with the princess for compromising her daughter. The princess
had grown accustomed to this already with her other daughters, but now
she felt that there was more ground for the prince’s touchiness. She saw
that of late years much was changed in the manners of society, that a
mother’s duties had become still more difficult. She saw that girls of
Kitty’s age formed some sort of clubs, went to some sort of lectures,
mixed freely in men’s society; drove about the streets alone, many of
them did not curtsey, and, what was the most important thing, all the
girls were firmly convinced that to choose their husbands was their own
affair, and not their parents’. "Marriages aren’t made nowadays as they
used to be," was thought and said by all these young girls, and even by
their elders. But how marriages were made now, the princess could not
learn from any one. The French fashion—of the parents arranging their
children’s future—was not accepted; it was condemned. The English
fashion of the complete independence of girls was also not accepted, and
not possible in Russian society. The Russian fashion of match-making by
the offices of intermediate persons was for some reason considered
unseemly; it was ridiculed by every one, and by the princess herself.
But how girls were to be married, and how parents were to marry them, no
one knew. Everyone with whom the princess had chanced to discuss the
matter said the same thing: "Mercy on us, it’s high time in our day to
cast off all that old-fashioned business. It’s the young people have to
marry; and not their parents; and so we ought to leave the young people
to arrange it as they choose." It was very easy for anyone to say that
who had no daughters, but the princess realized that in the process of
getting to know each other, her daughter might fall in love, and fall in
love with someone who did not care to marry her or who was quite unfit
to be her husband. And, however much it was instilled into the princess
that in our times young people ought to arrange their lives for
themselves, she was unable to believe it, just as she would have been
unable to believe that, at any time whatever, the most suitable
playthings for children five years old ought to be loaded pistols. And
so the princess was more uneasy over Kitty than she had been over her
elder sisters.

Now she was afraid that Vronsky might confine himself to simply flirting
with her daughter. She saw that her daughter was in love with him, but
tried to comfort herself with the thought that he was an honorable man,
and would not do this. But at the same time she knew how easy it is,
with the freedom of manners of today, to turn a girl’s head, and how
lightly men generally regard such a crime. The week before, Kitty had
told her mother of a conversation she had with Vronsky during a mazurka.
This conversation had partly reassured the princess; but perfectly at
ease she could not be. Vronsky had told Kitty that both he and his
brother were so used to obeying their mother that they never made up
their minds to any important undertaking without consulting her. "And
just now, I am impatiently awaiting my mother’s arrival from Petersburg,
as peculiarly fortunate," he told her.

Kitty had repeated this without attaching any significance to the words.
But her mother saw them in a different light. She knew that the old lady
was expected from day to day, that she would be pleased at her son’s
choice, and she felt it strange that he should not make his offer
through fear of vexing his mother. However, she was so anxious for the
marriage itself, and still more for relief from her fears, that she
believed it was so. Bitter as it was for the princess to see the
unhappiness of her eldest daughter, Dolly, on the point of leaving her
husband, her anxiety over the decision of her youngest daughter’s fate
engrossed all her feelings. Today, with Levin’s reappearance, a fresh
source of anxiety arose. She was afraid that her daughter, who had at
one time, as she fancied, a feeling for Levin, might, from extreme sense
of honor, refuse Vronsky, and that Levin’s arrival might generally
complicate and delay the affair so near being concluded.

"There’s one thing I want to say..." began the princess, and from her
serious and alert face, Kitty guessed what it would be.

"Never, mamma, none," answered Kitty, flushing a little, and looking her
mother straight in the face, "but there’s no use in my telling you
anything, and I ... I ... if I wanted to, I don’t know what to say or
how ... I don’t know..."

After dinner, and till the beginning of the evening, Kitty was feeling a
sensation akin to the sensation of a young man before a battle. Her
heart throbbed violently, and her thoughts would not rest on anything.

At half-past seven she had only just gone down into the drawing room,
when the footman announced, "Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin." The
princess was still in her room, and the prince had not come in. "So it
is to be," thought Kitty, and all the blood seemed to rush to her heart.
She was horrified at her paleness, as she glanced into the
looking-glass. At that moment she knew beyond doubt that he had come
early on purpose to find her alone and to make her an offer. And only
then for the first time the whole thing presented itself in a new,
different aspect; only then she realized that the question did not
affect her only—with whom she would be happy, and whom she loved—but
that she would have that moment to wound a man whom she liked. And to
wound him cruelly. What for? Because he, dear fellow, loved her, was in
love with her. But there was no help for it, so it must be, so it would
have to be.

"Oh, no," said Kitty, and sat down at the table.

But at that very moment the princess came in. There was a look of horror
on her face when she saw them alone, and their disturbed faces. Levin
bowed to her, and said nothing. Kitty did not speak nor lift her eyes.
"Thank God, she has refused him," thought the mother, and her face
lighted up with the habitual smile with which she greeted her guests on
Thursdays. She sat down and began questioning Levin about his life in
the country. He sat down again, waiting for other visitors to arrive, in
order to retreat unnoticed.

Five minutes later there came in a friend of Kitty’s, married the
preceding winter, Countess Nordston.

She was a thin, sallow, sickly, and nervous woman, with brilliant black
eyes. She was fond of Kitty, and her affection for her showed itself, as
the affection of married women for girls always does, in the desire to
make a match for Kitty after her own ideal of married happiness; she
wanted her to marry Vronsky. Levin she had often met at the
Shtcherbatskys’ early in the winter, and she had always disliked him.
Her invariable and favorite pursuit, when they met, consisted in making
fun of him.

"Ah, Konstantin Dmitrievitch! So you’ve come back to our corrupt
Babylon," she said, giving him her tiny, yellow hand, and recalling what
he had chanced to say early in the winter, that Moscow was a Babylon.
"Come, is Babylon reformed, or have you degenerated?" she added,
glancing with a simper at Kitty.

"Oh, I should think so! I always note them all down. Well, Kitty, have
you been skating again?..."

And she began talking to Kitty. Awkward as it was for Levin to withdraw
now, it would still have been easier for him to perpetrate this
awkwardness than to remain all the evening and see Kitty, who glanced at
him now and then and avoided his eyes. He was on the point of getting
up, when the princess, noticing that he was silent, addressed him.

"There’s something the matter with him," thought Countess Nordston,
glancing at his stern, serious face. "He isn’t in his old argumentative
mood. But I’ll draw him out. I do love making a fool of him before
Kitty, and I’ll do it."

"That must be Vronsky," thought Levin, and, to be sure of it, glanced at
Kitty. She had already had time to look at Vronsky, and looked round at
Levin. And simply from the look in her eyes, that grew unconsciously
brighter, Levin knew that she loved that man, knew it as surely as if
she had told him so in words. But what sort of a man was he? Now,
whether for good or for ill, Levin could not choose but remain; he must
find out what the man was like whom she loved.

There are people who, on meeting a successful rival, no matter in what,
are at once disposed to turn their backs on everything good in him, and
to see only what is bad. There are people, on the other hand, who desire
above all to find in that lucky rival the qualities by which he has
outstripped them, and seek with a throbbing ache at heart only what is
good. Levin belonged to the second class. But he had no difficulty in
finding what was good and attractive in Vronsky. It was apparent at the
first glance. Vronsky was a squarely built, dark man, not very tall,
with a good-humored, handsome, and exceedingly calm and resolute face.
Everything about his face and figure, from his short-cropped black hair
and freshly shaven chin down to his loosely fitting, brand-new uniform,
was simple and at the same time elegant. Making way for the lady who had
come in, Vronsky went up to the princess and then to Kitty.

He talked on, addressing both Kitty and Levin, turning his serene,
friendly eyes from one to the other, and saying obviously just what came
into his head.

"Oh, no, Masha, Konstantin Dmitrievitch said he could not believe in
it," said Kitty, blushing for Levin, and Levin saw this, and, still more
exasperated, would have answered, but Vronsky with his bright frank
smile rushed to the support of the conversation, which was threatening
to become disagreeable.

Kitty got up to fetch a table, and as she passed, her eyes met Levin’s.
She felt for him with her whole heart, the more because she was pitying
him for suffering of which she was herself the cause. "If you can
forgive me, forgive me," said her eyes, "I am so happy."

Kitty felt how distasteful her father’s warmth was to Levin after what
had happened. She saw, too, how coldly her father responded at last to
Vronsky’s bow, and how Vronsky looked with amiable perplexity at her
father, as though trying and failing to understand how and why anyone
could be hostilely disposed towards him, and she flushed.

"I hope you will be there?" he said to Kitty. As soon as the old prince
turned away from him, Levin went out unnoticed, and the last impression
he carried away with him of that evening was the smiling, happy face of
Kitty answering Vronsky’s inquiry about the ball.

At the end of the evening Kitty told her mother of her conversation with
Levin, and in spite of all the pity she felt for Levin, she was glad at
the thought that she had received an _offer_. She had no doubt that she
had acted rightly. But after she had gone to bed, for a long while she
could not sleep. One impression pursued her relentlessly. It was Levin’s
face, with his scowling brows, and his kind eyes looking out in dark
dejection below them, as he stood listening to her father, and glancing
at her and at Vronsky. And she felt so sorry for him that tears came
into her eyes. But immediately she thought of the man for whom she had
given him up. She vividly recalled his manly, resolute face, his noble
self-possession, and the good nature conspicuous in everything towards
everyone. She remembered the love for her of the man she loved, and once
more all was gladness in her soul, and she lay on the pillow, smiling
with happiness. "I’m sorry, I’m sorry; but what could I do? It’s not my
fault," she said to herself; but an inner voice told her something else.
Whether she felt remorse at having won Levin’s love, or at having
refused him, she did not know. But her happiness was poisoned by doubts.
"Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us!"
she repeated to herself, till she fell asleep.

She, pleased and happy after her conversation with her daughter, had
gone to the prince to say good-night as usual, and though she had no
intention of telling him of Levin’s offer and Kitty’s refusal, still she
hinted to her husband that she fancied things were practically settled
with Vronsky, and that he would declare himself so soon as his mother
arrived. And thereupon, at those words, the prince had all at once flown
into a passion, and began to use unseemly language.

"Oh, yes, you fancy! And how if she really is in love, and he’s no more
thinking of marriage than I am!... Oh, that I should live to see it! Ah!
spiritualism! Ah! Nice! Ah! the ball!" And the prince, imagining that he
was mimicking his wife, made a mincing curtsey at each word. "And this
is how we’re preparing wretchedness for Kitty; and she’s really got the
notion into her head..."

The princess had at first been quite certain that that evening had
settled Kitty’s future, and that there could be no doubt of Vronsky’s
intentions, but her husband’s words had disturbed her. And returning to
her own room, in terror before the unknown future, she, too, like Kitty,
repeated several times in her heart, "Lord, have pity; Lord, have pity;
Lord, have pity."

In Moscow he had for the first time felt, after his luxurious and coarse
life at Petersburg, all the charm of intimacy with a sweet and innocent
girl of his own rank, who cared for him. It never even entered his head
that there could be any harm in his relations with Kitty. At balls he
danced principally with her. He was a constant visitor at their house.
He talked to her as people commonly do talk in society—all sorts of
nonsense, but nonsense to which he could not help attaching a special
meaning in her case. Although he said nothing to her that he could not
have said before everybody, he felt that she was becoming more and more
dependent upon him, and the more he felt this, the better he liked it,
and the tenderer was his feeling for her. He did not know that his mode
of behavior in relation to Kitty had a definite character, that it is
courting young girls with no intention of marriage, and that such
courting is one of the evil actions common among brilliant young men
such as he was. It seemed to him that he was the first who had
discovered this pleasure, and he was enjoying his discovery.

If he could have heard what her parents were saying that evening, if he
could have put himself at the point of view of the family and have heard
that Kitty would be unhappy if he did not marry her, he would have been
greatly astonished, and would not have believed it. He could not believe
that what gave such great and delicate pleasure to him, and above all to
her, could be wrong. Still less could he have believed that he ought to
marry.

But though Vronsky had not the least suspicion what the parents were
saying, he felt on coming away from the Shtcherbatskys’ that the secret
spiritual bond which existed between him and Kitty had grown so much
stronger that evening that some step must be taken. But what step could
and ought to be taken he could not imagine.

Besides the charm Oblonsky had in general for everyone, Vronsky had felt
of late specially drawn to him by the fact that in his imagination he
was associated with Kitty.

"No," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who felt a great inclination to tell
Vronsky of Levin’s intentions in regard to Kitty. "No, you’ve not got a
true impression of Levin. He’s a very nervous man, and is sometimes out
of humor, it’s true, but then he is often very nice. He’s such a true,
honest nature, and a heart of gold. But yesterday there were special
reasons," pursued Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a meaning smile, totally
oblivious of the genuine sympathy he had felt the day before for his
friend, and feeling the same sympathy now, only for Vronsky. "Yes, there
were reasons why he could not help being either particularly happy or
particularly unhappy."

Vronsky, standing beside Oblonsky, watched the carriages and the
passengers, totally oblivious of his mother. What he had just heard
about Kitty excited and delighted him. Unconsciously he arched his
chest, and his eyes flashed. He felt himself a conqueror.

"Yes. You know we’re hoping he will marry Kitty."

Immediately after dinner Kitty came in. She knew Anna Arkadyevna, but
only very slightly, and she came now to her sister’s with some
trepidation, at the prospect of meeting this fashionable Petersburg
lady, whom everyone spoke so highly of. But she made a favorable
impression on Anna Arkadyevna—she saw that at once. Anna was
unmistakably admiring her loveliness and her youth: before Kitty knew
where she was she found herself not merely under Anna’s sway, but in
love with her, as young girls do fall in love with older and married
women. Anna was not like a fashionable lady, nor the mother of a boy of
eight years old. In the elasticity of her movements, the freshness and
the unflagging eagerness which persisted in her face, and broke out in
her smile and her glance, she would rather have passed for a girl of
twenty, had it not been for a serious and at times mournful look in her
eyes, which struck and attracted Kitty. Kitty felt that Anna was
perfectly simple and was concealing nothing, but that she had another
higher world of interests inaccessible to her, complex and poetic.

"And when is your next ball?" she asked Kitty.

"No, my dear, for me there are no balls now where one enjoys oneself,"
said Anna, and Kitty detected in her eyes that mysterious world which
was not open to her. "For me there are some less dull and tiresome."

Kitty perceived that Anna knew what answer would follow.

"Are you coming to this ball?" asked Kitty.

Kitty smiled without speaking. "But how did she go through it? How I
should like to know all her love story!" thought Kitty, recalling the
unromantic appearance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her husband.

"Oh, was he there?" asked Kitty, blushing. "What was it Stiva told you?"

But she did not tell Kitty about the two hundred roubles. For some
reason it was disagreeable to her to think of it. She felt that there
was something that had to do with her in it, and something that ought
not to have been.

"She pressed me very much to go and see her," Anna went on; "and I shall
be glad to go to see her tomorrow. Stiva is staying a long while in
Dolly’s room, thank God," Anna added, changing the subject, and getting
up, Kitty fancied, displeased with something.

From his tone both Kitty and Anna knew that a reconciliation had taken
place.

"It’s early for me to be fetched, and for anyone else it’s late,"
observed Kitty.

Kitty blushed. She thought that she was the only person who knew why he
had come, and why he would not come up. "He has been at home," she
thought, "and didn’t find me, and thought I should be here, but he did
not come up because he thought it late, and Anna’s here."

The ball was only just beginning as Kitty and her mother walked up the
great staircase, flooded with light, and lined with flowers and footmen
in powder and red coats. From the rooms came a constant, steady hum, as
from a hive, and the rustle of movement; and while on the landing
between trees they gave last touches to their hair and dresses before
the mirror, they heard from the ballroom the careful, distinct notes of
the fiddles of the orchestra beginning the first waltz. A little old man
in civilian dress, arranging his gray curls before another mirror, and
diffusing an odor of scent, stumbled against them on the stairs, and
stood aside, evidently admiring Kitty, whom he did not know. A beardless
youth, one of those society youths whom the old Prince Shtcherbatsky
called "young bucks," in an exceedingly open waistcoat, straightening
his white tie as he went, bowed to them, and after running by, came back
to ask Kitty for a quadrille. As the first quadrille had already been
given to Vronsky, she had to promise this youth the second. An officer,
buttoning his glove, stood aside in the doorway, and stroking his
mustache, admired rosy Kitty.

Although her dress, her coiffure, and all the preparations for the ball
had cost Kitty great trouble and consideration, at this moment she
walked into the ballroom in her elaborate tulle dress over a pink slip
as easily and simply as though all the rosettes and lace, all the minute
details of her attire, had not cost her or her family a moment’s
attention, as though she had been born in that tulle and lace, with her
hair done up high on her head, and a rose and two leaves on the top of
it.

When, just before entering the ballroom, the princess, her mother, tried
to turn right side out of the ribbon of her sash, Kitty had drawn back a
little. She felt that everything must be right of itself, and graceful,
and nothing could need setting straight.

It was one of Kitty’s best days. Her dress was not uncomfortable
anywhere; her lace berthe did not droop anywhere; her rosettes were not
crushed nor torn off; her pink slippers with high, hollowed-out heels
did not pinch, but gladdened her feet; and the thick rolls of fair
chignon kept up on her head as if they were her own hair. All the three
buttons buttoned up without tearing on the long glove that covered her
hand without concealing its lines. The black velvet of her locket
nestled with special softness round her neck. That velvet was delicious;
at home, looking at her neck in the looking glass, Kitty had felt that
that velvet was speaking. About all the rest there might be a doubt, but
the velvet was delicious. Kitty smiled here too, at the ball, when she
glanced at it in the glass. Her bare shoulders and arms gave Kitty a
sense of chill marble, a feeling she particularly liked. Her eyes
sparkled, and her rosy lips could not keep from smiling from the
consciousness of her own attractiveness. She had scarcely entered the
ballroom and reached the throng of ladies, all tulle, ribbons, lace, and
flowers, waiting to be asked to dance—Kitty was never one of that
throng—when she was asked for a waltz, and asked by the best partner,
the first star in the hierarchy of the ballroom, a renowned director of
dances, a married man, handsome and well-built, Yegorushka Korsunsky. He
had only just left the Countess Bonina, with whom he had danced the
first half of the waltz, and, scanning his kingdom—that is to say, a few
couples who had started dancing—he caught sight of Kitty, entering, and
flew up to her with that peculiar, easy amble which is confined to
directors of balls. Without even asking her if she cared to dance, he
put out his arm to encircle her slender waist. She looked round for
someone to give her fan to, and their hostess, smiling to her, took it.

She smiled at his praise, and continued to look about the room over his
shoulder. She was not like a girl at her first ball, for whom all faces
in the ballroom melt into one vision of fairyland. And she was not a
girl who had gone the stale round of balls till every face in the
ballroom was familiar and tiresome. But she was in the middle stage
between these two; she was excited, and at the same time she had
sufficient self-possession to be able to observe. In the left corner of
the ballroom she saw the cream of society gathered together.
There—incredibly naked—was the beauty Lidi, Korsunsky’s wife; there was
the lady of the house; there shone the bald head of Krivin, always to be
found where the best people were. In that direction gazed the young men,
not venturing to approach. There, too, she descried Stiva, and there she
saw the exquisite figure and head of Anna in a black velvet gown. And
_he_ was there. Kitty had not seen him since the evening she refused
Levin. With her long-sighted eyes, she knew him at once, and was even
aware that he was looking at her.

And Korsunsky began waltzing with measured steps straight towards the
group in the left corner, continually saying, "Pardon, mesdames, pardon,
pardon, mesdames"; and steering his course through the sea of lace,
tulle, and ribbon, and not disarranging a feather, he turned his partner
sharply round, so that her slim ankles, in light transparent stockings,
were exposed to view, and her train floated out in fan shape and covered
Krivin’s knees. Korsunsky bowed, set straight his open shirt front, and
gave her his arm to conduct her to Anna Arkadyevna. Kitty, flushed, took
her train from Krivin’s knees, and, a little giddy, looked round,
seeking Anna. Anna was not in lilac, as Kitty had so urgently wished,
but in a black, low-cut, velvet gown, showing her full throat and
shoulders, that looked as though carved in old ivory, and her rounded
arms, with tiny, slender wrists. The whole gown was trimmed with
Venetian guipure. On her head, among her black hair—her own, with no
false additions—was a little wreath of pansies, and a bouquet of the
same in the black ribbon of her sash among white lace. Her coiffure was
not striking. All that was noticeable was the little wilful tendrils of
her curly hair that would always break free about her neck and temples.
Round her well-cut, strong neck was a thread of pearls.

Kitty had been seeing Anna every day; she adored her, and had pictured
her invariably in lilac. But now seeing her in black, she felt that she
had not fully seen her charm. She saw her now as someone quite new and
surprising to her. Now she understood that Anna could not have been in
lilac, and that her charm was just that she always stood out against her
attire, that her dress could never be noticeable on her. And her black
dress, with its sumptuous lace, was not noticeable on her; it was only
the frame, and all that was seen was she—simple, natural, elegant, and
at the same time gay and eager.

She was standing holding herself, as always, very erect, and when Kitty
drew near the group she was speaking to the master of the house, her
head slightly turned towards him.

"No, I don’t throw stones," she was saying, in answer to something,
"though I can’t understand it," she went on, shrugging her shoulders,
and she turned at once with a soft smile of protection towards Kitty.
With a flying, feminine glance she scanned her attire, and made a
movement of her head, hardly perceptible, but understood by Kitty,
signifying approval of her dress and her looks. "You came into the room
dancing," she added.

"What is she vexed with him about?" thought Kitty, discerning that Anna
had intentionally not responded to Vronsky’s bow. Vronsky went up to
Kitty reminding her of the first quadrille, and expressing his regret
that he had not seen her all this time. Kitty gazed in admiration at
Anna waltzing, and listened to him. She expected him to ask her for a
waltz, but he did not, and she glanced wonderingly at him. He flushed
slightly, and hurriedly asked her to waltz, but he had only just put his
arm round her waist and taken the first step when the music suddenly
stopped. Kitty looked into his face, which was so close to her own, and
long afterwards—for several years after—that look, full of love, to
which he made no response, cut her to the heart with an agony of shame.

Vronsky and Kitty waltzed several times round the room. After the first
waltz Kitty went to her mother, and she had hardly time to say a few
words to Countess Nordston when Vronsky came up again for the first
quadrille. During the quadrille nothing of any significance was said:
there was disjointed talk between them of the Korsunskys, husband and
wife, whom he described very amusingly, as delightful children at forty,
and of the future town theater; and only once the conversation touched
her to the quick, when he asked her about Levin, whether he was here,
and added that he liked him so much. But Kitty did not expect much from
the quadrille. She looked forward with a thrill at her heart to the
mazurka. She fancied that in the mazurka everything must be decided. The
fact that he did not during the quadrille ask her for the mazurka did
not trouble her. She felt sure she would dance the mazurka with him as
she had done at former balls, and refused five young men, saying she was
engaged for the mazurka. The whole ball up to the last quadrille was for
Kitty an enchanted vision of delightful colors, sounds, and motions. She
only sat down when she felt too tired and begged for a rest. But as she
was dancing the last quadrille with one of the tiresome young men whom
she could not refuse, she chanced to be vis-a-vis with Vronsky and Anna.
She had not been near Anna again since the beginning of the evening, and
now again she saw her suddenly quite new and surprising. She saw in her
the signs of that excitement of success she knew so well in herself; she
saw that she was intoxicated with the delighted admiration she was
exciting. She knew that feeling and knew its signs, and saw them in
Anna; saw the quivering, flashing light in her eyes, and the smile of
happiness and excitement unconsciously playing on her lips, and the
deliberate grace, precision, and lightness of her movements.

"Who?" she asked herself. "All or one?" And not assisting the harassed
young man she was dancing with in the conversation, the thread of which
he had lost and could not pick up again, she obeyed with external
liveliness the peremptory shouts of Korsunsky starting them all into the
_grand rond_, and then into the _châine_, and at the same time she kept
watch with a growing pang at her heart. "No, it’s not the admiration of
the crowd has intoxicated her, but the adoration of one. And that one?
can it be he?" Every time he spoke to Anna the joyous light flashed into
her eyes, and the smile of happiness curved her red lips. she seemed to
make an effort to control herself, to try not to show these signs of
delight, but they came out on her face of themselves. "But what of him?"
Kitty looked at him and was filled with terror. What was pictured so
clearly to Kitty in the mirror of Anna’s face she saw in him. What had
become of his always self-possessed resolute manner, and the carelessly
serene expression of his face? Now every time he turned to her, he bent
his head, as though he would have fallen at her feet, and in his eyes
there was nothing but humble submission and dread. "I would not offend
you," his eyes seemed every time to be saying, "but I want to save
myself, and I don’t know how." On his face was a look such as Kitty had
never seen before.

They were speaking of common acquaintances, keeping up the most trivial
conversation, but to Kitty it seemed that every word they said was
determining their fate and hers. And strange it was that they were
actually talking of how absurd Ivan Ivanovitch was with his French, and
how the Eletsky girl might have made a better match, yet these words had
all the while consequence for them, and they were feeling just as Kitty
did. The whole ball, the whole world, everything seemed lost in fog in
Kitty’s soul. Nothing but the stern discipline of her bringing-up
supported her and forced her to do what was expected of her, that is, to
dance, to answer questions, to talk, even to smile. But before the
mazurka, when they were beginning to rearrange the chairs and a few
couples moved out of the smaller rooms into the big room, a moment of
despair and horror came for Kitty. She had refused five partners, and
now she was not dancing the mazurka. She had not even a hope of being
asked for it, because she was so successful in society that the idea
would never occur to anyone that she had remained disengaged till now.
She would have to tell her mother she felt ill and go home, but she had
not the strength to do this. She felt crushed. She went to the furthest
end of the little drawing room and sank into a low chair. Her light,
transparent skirts rose like a cloud about her slender waist; one bare,
thin, soft, girlish arm, hanging listlessly, was lost in the folds of
her pink tunic; in the other she held her fan, and with rapid, short
strokes fanned her burning face. But while she looked like a butterfly,
clinging to a blade of grass, and just about to open its rainbow wings
for fresh flight, her heart ached with a horrible despair.

"Kitty, what is it?" said Countess Nordston, stepping noiselessly over
the carpet towards her. "I don’t understand it."

Kitty’s lower lip began to quiver; she got up quickly.

"Kitty, you’re not dancing the mazurka?"

"No, no," said Kitty in a voice shaking with tears.

"He asked her for the mazurka before me," said Countess Nordston,
knowing Kitty would understand who were "he" and "her." "She said: ‘Why,
aren’t you going to dance it with Princess Shtcherbatskaya?’"

"Oh, I don’t care!" answered Kitty.

Countess Nordston found Korsunsky, with whom she was to dance the
mazurka, and told him to ask Kitty.

Kitty danced in the first couple, and luckily for her she had not to
talk, because Korsunsky was all the time running about directing the
figure. Vronsky and Anna sat almost opposite her. She saw them with her
long-sighted eyes, and saw them, too, close by, when they met in the
figures, and the more she saw of them the more convinced was she that
her unhappiness was complete. She saw that they felt themselves alone in
that crowded room. And on Vronsky’s face, always so firm and
independent, she saw that look that had struck her, of bewilderment and
humble submissiveness, like the expression of an intelligent dog when it
has done wrong.

Anna smiled, and her smile was reflected by him. She grew thoughtful,
and he became serious. Some supernatural force drew Kitty’s eyes to
Anna’s face. She was fascinating in her simple black dress, fascinating
were her round arms with their bracelets, fascinating was her firm neck
with its thread of pearls, fascinating the straying curls of her loose
hair, fascinating the graceful, light movements of her little feet and
hands, fascinating was that lovely face in its eagerness, but there was
something terrible and cruel in her fascination.

Kitty admired her more than ever, and more and more acute was her
suffering. Kitty felt overwhelmed, and her face showed it. When Vronsky
saw her, coming across her in the mazurka, he did not at once recognize
her, she was so changed.

In the middle of the mazurka, repeating a complicated figure, newly
invented by Korsunsky, Anna came forward into the center of the circle,
chose two gentlemen, and summoned a lady and Kitty. Kitty gazed at her
in dismay as she went up. Anna looked at her with drooping eyelids, and
smiled, pressing her hand. But, noticing that Kitty only responded to
her smile by a look of despair and amazement, she turned away from her,
and began gaily talking to the other lady.

"Yes, there is something uncanny, devilish and fascinating in her,"
Kitty said to herself.

Kitty, too, did not come, sending a note that she had a headache. Dolly
and Anna dined alone with the children and the English governess.
Whether it was that the children were fickle, or that they had acute
senses, and felt that Anna was quite different that day from what she
had been when they had taken such a fancy to her, that she was not now
interested in them,—but they had abruptly dropped their play with their
aunt, and their love for her, and were quite indifferent that she was
going away. Anna was absorbed the whole morning in preparations for her
departure. She wrote notes to her Moscow acquaintances, put down her
accounts, and packed. Altogether Dolly fancied she was not in a placid
state of mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly knew well with
herself, and which does not come without cause, and for the most part
covers dissatisfaction with self. After dinner, Anna went up to her room
to dress, and Dolly followed her.

"Yes," Anna went on. "Do you know why Kitty didn’t come to dinner? She’s
jealous of me. I have spoiled ... I’ve been the cause of that ball being
a torture to her instead of a pleasure. But truly, truly, it’s not my
fault, or only my fault a little bit," she said, daintily drawling the
words "a little bit."

"But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on his
side," Anna interrupted her. "And I am certain it will all be forgotten,
and Kitty will leave off hating me."

"All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I’m not very anxious for
this marriage for Kitty. And it’s better it should come to nothing, if
he, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you in a single day."

"Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!" said Anna, and again a deep
flush of pleasure came out on her face, when she heard the idea, that
absorbed her, put into words. "And so here I am going away, having made
an enemy of Kitty, whom I liked so much! Ah, how sweet she is! But
you’ll make it right, Dolly? Eh?"

At the end of the winter, in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, a consultation
was being held, which was to pronounce on the state of Kitty’s health
and the measures to be taken to restore her failing strength. She had
been ill, and as spring came on she grew worse. The family doctor gave
her cod liver oil, then iron, then nitrate of silver, but as the first
and the second and the third were alike in doing no good, and as his
advice when spring came was to go abroad, a celebrated physician was
called in. The celebrated physician, a very handsome man, still
youngish, asked to examine the patient. He maintained, with peculiar
satisfaction, it seemed, that maiden modesty is a mere relic of
barbarism, and that nothing could be more natural than for a man still
youngish to handle a young girl naked. He thought it natural because he
did it every day, and felt and thought, as it seemed to him, no harm as
he did it and consequently he considered modesty in the girl not merely
as a relic of barbarism, but also as an insult to himself.

There was nothing for it but to submit, since, although all the doctors
had studied in the same school, had read the same books, and learned the
same science, and though some people said this celebrated doctor was a
bad doctor, in the princess’s household and circle it was for some
reason accepted that this celebrated doctor alone had some special
knowledge, and that he alone could save Kitty. After a careful
examination and sounding of the bewildered patient, dazed with shame,
the celebrated doctor, having scrupulously washed his hands, was
standing in the drawing room talking to the prince. The prince frowned
and coughed, listening to the doctor. As a man who had seen something of
life, and neither a fool nor an invalid, he had no faith in medicine,
and in his heart was furious at the whole farce, specially as he was
perhaps the only one who fully comprehended the cause of Kitty’s
illness. "Conceited blockhead!" he thought, as he listened to the
celebrated doctor’s chatter about his daughter’s symptoms. The doctor
was meantime with difficulty restraining the expression of his contempt
for this old gentleman, and with difficulty condescending to the level
of his intelligence. He perceived that it was no good talking to the old
man, and that the principal person in the house was the mother. Before
her he decided to scatter his pearls. At that instant the princess came
into the drawing room with the family doctor. The prince withdrew,
trying not to show how ridiculous he thought the whole performance. The
princess was distracted, and did not know what to do. She felt she had
sinned against Kitty.

And the mother, accompanied by the doctor, went into the drawing room to
Kitty. Wasted and flushed, with a peculiar glitter in her eyes, left
there by the agony of shame she had been put through, Kitty stood in the
middle of the room. When the doctor came in she flushed crimson, and her
eyes filled with tears. All her illness and treatment struck her as a
thing so stupid, ludicrous even! Doctoring her seemed to her as absurd
as putting together the pieces of a broken vase. Her heart was broken.
Why would they try to cure her with pills and powders? But she could not
grieve her mother, especially as her mother considered herself to blame.

"Nervous irritability," he said to the princess, when Kitty had left the
room. "However, I had finished..."

It seemed as though some piece of good fortune had come to pass after
the doctor had gone. The mother was much more cheerful when she went
back to her daughter, and Kitty pretended to be more cheerful. She had
often, almost always, to be pretending now.

Soon after the doctor, Dolly had arrived. She knew that there was to be
a consultation that day, and though she was only just up after her
confinement (she had another baby, a little girl, born at the end of the
winter), though she had trouble and anxiety enough of her own, she had
left her tiny baby and a sick child, to come and hear Kitty’s fate,
which was to be decided that day.

"Ah, mamma, we have plenty of troubles of our own. Lili is ill, and I’m
afraid it’s scarlatina. I have come here now to hear about Kitty, and
then I shall shut myself up entirely, if—God forbid—it should be
scarlatina."

"Mamma, why shouldn’t father come with us?" said Kitty. "It would be
nicer for him and for us too."

The old prince got up and stroked Kitty’s hair. She lifted her head and
looked at him with a forced smile. It always seemed to her that he
understood her better than anyone in the family, though he did not say
much about her. Being the youngest, she was her father’s favorite, and
she fancied that his love gave him insight. When now her glance met his
blue kindly eyes looking intently at her, it seemed to her that he saw
right through her, and understood all that was not good that was passing
within her. Reddening, she stretched out towards him expecting a kiss,
but he only patted her hair and said:

What her father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words Kitty
became confused and overcome like a detected criminal. "Yes, he sees it
all, he understands it all, and in these words he’s telling me that
though I’m ashamed, I must get over my shame." She could not pluck up
spirit to make any answer. She tried to begin, and all at once burst
into tears, and rushed out of the room.

Before this, as soon as Kitty went out of the room in tears, Dolly, with
her motherly, family instincts, had promptly perceived that here a
woman’s work lay before her, and she prepared to do it. She took off her
hat, and, morally speaking, tucked up her sleeves and prepared for
action. While her mother was attacking her father, she tried to restrain
her mother, so far as filial reverence would allow. During the prince’s
outburst she was silent; she felt ashamed for her mother, and tender
towards her father for so quickly being kind again. But when her father
left them she made ready for what was the chief thing needful—to go to
Kitty and console her.

"I’d been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma: did you
know that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when he was here the last
time? He told Stiva so."

"So did Kitty perhaps refuse him?... She didn’t tell you so?"

When she went into Kitty’s little room, a pretty, pink little room, full
of knick-knacks in _vieux saxe,_ as fresh, and pink, and white, and gay
as Kitty herself had been two months ago, Dolly remembered how they had
decorated the room the year before together, with what love and gaiety.
Her heart turned cold when she saw Kitty sitting on a low chair near the
door, her eyes fixed immovably on a corner of the rug. Kitty glanced at
her sister, and the cold, rather ill-tempered expression of her face did
not change.

"What about?" Kitty asked swiftly, lifting her head in dismay.

"Nonsense, Kitty. Do you suppose I could help knowing? I know all about
it. And believe me, it’s of so little consequence.... We’ve all been
through it."

Kitty did not speak, and her face had a stern expression.

"No, because he has treated me with contempt," said Kitty, in a breaking
voice. "Don’t talk of it! Please, don’t talk of it!"

"Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!" shrieked
Kitty, suddenly flying into a passion. She turned round on her chair,
flushed crimson, and rapidly moving her fingers, pinched the clasp of
her belt first with one hand and then with the other. Dolly knew this
trick her sister had of clenching her hands when she was much excited;
she knew, too, that in moments of excitement Kitty was capable of
forgetting herself and saying a great deal too much, and Dolly would
have soothed her, but it was too late.

"What, what is it you want to make me feel, eh?" said Kitty quickly.
"That I’ve been in love with a man who didn’t care a straw for me, and
that I’m dying of love for him? And this is said to me by my own sister,
who imagines that ... that ... that she’s sympathizing with me!... I
don’t want these condolences and humbug!"

"Kitty, you’re unjust."

But Kitty in her fury did not hear her.

The mention of Levin’s name seemed to deprive Kitty of the last vestige
of self-control. She leaped up from her chair, and flinging her clasp on
the ground, she gesticulated rapidly with her hands and said:

And saying these words she glanced at her sister, and seeing that Dolly
sat silent, her head mournfully bowed, Kitty, instead of running out of
the room as she had meant to do, sat down near the door, and hid her
face in her handkerchief.

The silence lasted for two minutes: Dolly was thinking of herself. That
humiliation of which she was always conscious came back to her with a
peculiar bitterness when her sister reminded her of it. She had not
looked for such cruelty in her sister, and she was angry with her. But
suddenly she heard the rustle of a skirt, and with it the sound of
heart-rending, smothered sobbing, and felt arms about her neck. Kitty
was on her knees before her.

As though tears were the indispensable oil, without which the machinery
of mutual confidence could not run smoothly between the two sisters, the
sisters after their tears talked, not of what was uppermost in their
minds, but, though they talked of outside matters, they understood each
other. Kitty knew that the words she had uttered in anger about her
husband’s infidelity and her humiliating position had cut her poor
sister to the heart, but that she had forgiven her. Dolly for her part
knew all she had wanted to find out. She felt certain that her surmises
were correct; that Kitty’s misery, her inconsolable misery, was due
precisely to the fact that Levin had made her an offer and she had
refused him, and Vronsky had deceived her, and that she was fully
prepared to love Levin and to detest Vronsky. Kitty said not a word of
that; she talked of nothing but her spiritual condition.

"The most utterly loathsome and coarse: I can’t tell you. It’s not
unhappiness, or low spirits, but much worse. As though everything that
was good in me was all hidden away, and nothing was left but the most
loathsome. Come, how am I to tell you?" she went on, seeing the puzzled
look in her sister’s eyes. "Father began saying something to me just
now.... It seems to me he thinks all I want is to be married. Mother
takes me to a ball: it seems to me she only takes me to get me married
off as soon as may be, and be rid of me. I know it’s not the truth, but
I can’t drive away such thoughts. Eligible suitors, as they call them—I
can’t bear to see them. It seems to me they’re taking stock of me and
summing me up. In old days to go anywhere in a ball dress was a simple
joy to me, I admired myself; now I feel ashamed and awkward. And then!
The doctor.... Then..." Kitty hesitated; she wanted to say further that
ever since this change had taken place in her, Stepan Arkadyevitch had
become insufferably repulsive to her, and that she could not see him
without the grossest and most hideous conceptions rising before her
imagination.

Kitty insisted on having her way, and went to stay at her sister’s and
nursed the children all through the scarlatina, for scarlatina it turned
out to be. The two sisters brought all the six children successfully
through it, but Kitty was no better in health, and in Lent the
Shtcherbatskys went abroad.

"Oh, I have had a letter from Moscow. They write me that Kitty
Shtcherbatskaya’s very ill."

"I want you to go to Moscow and ask for Kitty’s forgiveness," she said.

But three months had passed and he had not left off minding about it;
and it was as painful for him to think of it as it had been those first
days. He could not be at peace because after dreaming so long of family
life, and feeling himself so ripe for it, he was still not married, and
was further than ever from marriage. He was painfully conscious himself,
as were all about him, that at his years it is not well for man to be
alone. He remembered how before starting for Moscow he had once said to
his cowman Nikolay, a simple-hearted peasant, whom he liked talking to:
"Well, Nikolay! I mean to get married," and how Nikolay had promptly
answered, as of a matter on which there could be no possible doubt: "And
high time too, Konstantin Demitrievitch." But marriage had now become
further off than ever. The place was taken, and whenever he tried to
imagine any of the girls he knew in that place, he felt that it was
utterly impossible. Moreover, the recollection of the rejection and the
part he had played in the affair tortured him with shame. However often
he told himself that he was in no wise to blame in it, that
recollection, like other humiliating reminiscences of a similar kind,
made him twinge and blush. There had been in his past, as in every
man’s, actions, recognized by him as bad, for which his conscience ought
to have tormented him; but the memory of these evil actions was far from
causing him so much suffering as those trivial but humiliating
reminiscences. These wounds never healed. And with these memories was
now ranged his rejection and the pitiful position in which he must have
appeared to others that evening. But time and work did their part.
Bitter memories were more and more covered up by the incidents—paltry in
his eyes, but really important—of his country life. Every week he
thought less often of Kitty. He was impatiently looking forward to the
news that she was married, or just going to be married, hoping that such
news would, like having a tooth out, completely cure him.

Not one word did Stepan Arkadyevitch say in reference to Kitty and the
Shtcherbatskys; he merely gave him greetings from his wife. Levin was
grateful to him for his delicacy and was very glad of his visitor. As
always happened with him during his solitude, a mass of ideas and
feelings had been accumulating within him, which he could not
communicate to those about him. And now he poured out upon Stepan
Arkadyevitch his poetic joy in the spring, and his failures and plans
for the land, and his thoughts and criticisms on the books he had been
reading, and the idea of his own book, the basis of which really was,
though he was unaware of it himself, a criticism of all the old books on
agriculture. Stepan Arkadyevitch, always charming, understanding
everything at the slightest reference, was particularly charming on this
visit, and Levin noticed in him a special tenderness, as it were, and a
new tone of respect that flattered him.

"Perhaps because I rejoice in what I have, and don’t fret for what I
haven’t," said Levin, thinking of Kitty.

"Oh, yes, what was it that was unpleasant?" he wondered. "Yes, Kitty’s
ill.... Well, it can’t be helped; I’m very sorry," he thought.

On the way home Levin asked all details of Kitty’s illness and the
Shtcherbatskys’ plans, and though he would have been ashamed to admit
it, he was pleased at what he heard. He was pleased that there was still
hope, and still more pleased that she should be suffering who had made
him suffer so much. But when Stepan Arkadyevitch began to speak of the
causes of Kitty’s illness, and mentioned Vronsky’s name, Levin cut him
short.

Levin certainly was out of humor, and in spite of all his desire to be
affectionate and cordial to his charming visitor, he could not control
his mood. The intoxication of the news that Kitty was not married had
gradually begun to work upon him.

Kitty was not married, but ill, and ill from love for a man who had
slighted her. This slight, as it were, rebounded upon him. Vronsky had
slighted her, and she had slighted him, Levin. Consequently Vronsky had
the right to despise Levin, and therefore he was his enemy. But all this
Levin did not think out. He vaguely felt that there was something in it
insulting to him, and he was not angry now at what had disturbed him,
but he fell foul of everything that presented itself. The stupid sale of
the forest, the fraud practiced upon Oblonsky and concluded in his
house, exasperated him.

There was visiting the watering-place that year a real German Fürstin,
in consequence of which the crystallizing process went on more
vigorously than ever. Princess Shtcherbatskaya wished, above everything,
to present her daughter to this German princess, and the day after their
arrival she duly performed this rite. Kitty made a low and graceful
curtsey in the _very simple_, that is to say, very elegant frock that
had been ordered her from Paris. The German princess said, "I hope the
roses will soon come back to this pretty little face," and for the
Shtcherbatskys certain definite lines of existence were at once laid
down from which there was no departing. The Shtcherbatskys made the
acquaintance too of the family of an English Lady Somebody, and of a
German countess and her son, wounded in the last war, and of a learned
Swede, and of M. Canut and his sister. But yet inevitably the
Shtcherbatskys were thrown most into the society of a Moscow lady, Marya
Yevgenyevna Rtishtcheva and her daughter, whom Kitty disliked, because
she had fallen ill, like herself, over a love affair, and a Moscow
colonel, whom Kitty had known from childhood, and always seen in uniform
and epaulets, and who now, with his little eyes and his open neck and
flowered cravat, was uncommonly ridiculous and tedious, because there
was no getting rid of him. When all this was so firmly established,
Kitty began to be very much bored, especially as the prince went away to
Carlsbad and she was left alone with her mother. She took no interest in
the people she knew, feeling that nothing fresh would come of them. Her
chief mental interest in the watering-place consisted in watching and
making theories about the people she did not know. It was characteristic
of Kitty that she always imagined everything in people in the most
favorable light possible, especially so in those she did not know. And
now as she made surmises as to who people were, what were their
relations to one another, and what they were like, Kitty endowed them
with the most marvelous and noble characters, and found confirmation of
her idea in her observations.

Of these people the one that attracted her most was a Russian girl who
had come to the watering-place with an invalid Russian lady, Madame
Stahl, as everyone called her. Madame Stahl belonged to the highest
society, but she was so ill that she could not walk, and only on
exceptionally fine days made her appearance at the springs in an invalid
carriage. But it was not so much from ill-health as from pride—so
Princess Shtcherbatskaya interpreted it—that Madame Stahl had not made
the acquaintance of anyone among the Russians there. The Russian girl
looked after Madame Stahl, and besides that, she was, as Kitty observed,
on friendly terms with all the invalids who were seriously ill, and
there were many of them at the springs, and looked after them in the
most natural way. This Russian girl was not, as Kitty gathered, related
to Madame Stahl, nor was she a paid attendant. Madame Stahl called her
Varenka, and other people called her "Mademoiselle Varenka." Apart from
the interest Kitty took in this girl’s relations with Madame Stahl and
with other unknown persons, Kitty, as often happened, felt an
inexplicable attraction to Mademoiselle Varenka, and was aware when
their eyes met that she too liked her.

Of Mademoiselle Varenka one would not say that she had passed her first
youth, but she was, as it were, a creature without youth; she might have
been taken for nineteen or for thirty. If her features were criticized
separately, she was handsome rather than plain, in spite of the sickly
hue of her face. She would have been a good figure, too, if it had not
been for her extreme thinness and the size of her head, which was too
large for her medium height. But she was not likely to be attractive to
men. She was like a fine flower, already past its bloom and without
fragrance, though the petals were still unwithered. Moreover, she would
have been unattractive to men also from the lack of just what Kitty had
too much of—of the suppressed fire of vitality, and the consciousness of
her own attractiveness.

She always seemed absorbed in work about which there could be no doubt,
and so it seemed she could not take interest in anything outside it. It
was just this contrast with her own position that was for Kitty the
great attraction of Mademoiselle Varenka. Kitty felt that in her, in her
manner of life, she would find an example of what she was now so
painfully seeking: interest in life, a dignity in life—apart from the
worldly relations of girls with men, which so revolted Kitty, and
appeared to her now as a shameful hawking about of goods in search of a
purchaser. The more attentively Kitty watched her unknown friend, the
more convinced she was this girl was the perfect creature she fancied
her, and the more eagerly she wished to make her acquaintance.

The two girls used to meet several times a day, and every time they met,
Kitty’s eyes said: "Who are you? What are you? Are you really the
exquisite creature I imagine you to be? But for goodness’ sake don’t
suppose," her eyes added, "that I would force my acquaintance on you, I
simply admire you and like you." "I like you too, and you’re very, very
sweet. And I should like you better still, if I had time," answered the
eyes of the unknown girl. Kitty saw indeed, that she was always busy.
Either she was taking the children of a Russian family home from the
springs, or fetching a shawl for a sick lady, and wrapping her up in it,
or trying to interest an irritable invalid, or selecting and buying
cakes for tea for someone.

Soon after the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there appeared in the
morning crowd at the springs two persons who attracted universal and
unfavorable attention. These were a tall man with a stooping figure, and
huge hands, in an old coat too short for him, with black, simple, and
yet terrible eyes, and a pockmarked, kind-looking woman, very badly and
tastelessly dressed. Recognizing these persons as Russians, Kitty had
already in her imagination begun constructing a delightful and touching
romance about them. But the princess, having ascertained from the
visitors’ list that this was Nikolay Levin and Marya Nikolaevna,
explained to Kitty what a bad man this Levin was, and all her fancies
about these two people vanished. Not so much from what her mother told
her, as from the fact that it was Konstantin’s brother, this pair
suddenly seemed to Kitty intensely unpleasant. This Levin, with his
continual twitching of his head, aroused in her now an irrepressible
feeling of disgust.

Kitty was walking there with her mother and the Moscow colonel, smart
and jaunty in his European coat, bought ready-made at Frankfort. They
were walking on one side of the arcade, trying to avoid Levin, who was
walking on the other side. Varenka, in her dark dress, in a black hat
with a turn-down brim, was walking up and down the whole length of the
arcade with a blind Frenchwoman, and, every time she met Kitty, they
exchanged friendly glances.

"Mamma, couldn’t I speak to her?" said Kitty, watching her unknown
friend, and noticing that she was going up to the spring, and that they
might come there together.

Kitty knew that the princess was offended that Madame Stahl had seemed
to avoid making her acquaintance. Kitty did not insist.

They turned to go back, when suddenly they heard, not noisy talk, but
shouting. Levin, stopping short, was shouting at the doctor, and the
doctor, too, was excited. A crowd gathered about them. The princess and
Kitty beat a hasty retreat, while the colonel joined the crowd to find
out what was the matter.

"Mademoiselle Varenka?" asked Kitty.

"There, mamma," said Kitty; "you wonder that I’m enthusiastic about
her."

The next day, as she watched her unknown friend, Kitty noticed that
Mademoiselle Varenka was already on the same terms with Levin and his
companion as with her other _protégés_. She went up to them, entered
into conversation with them, and served as interpreter for the woman,
who could not speak any foreign language.

Kitty began to entreat her mother still more urgently to let her make
friends with Varenka. And, disagreeable as it was to the princess to
seem to take the first step in wishing to make the acquaintance of
Madame Stahl, who thought fit to give herself airs, she made inquiries
about Varenka, and, having ascertained particulars about her tending to
prove that there could be no harm though little good in the
acquaintance, she herself approached Varenka and made acquaintance with
her.

This was so simply said, and so sweet was the truthful and candid
expression of her face, that the princess saw why Kitty had taken such a
fancy to Varenka.

At that instant Kitty came up from the spring beaming with delight that
her mother had become acquainted with her unknown friend.

"Well, see, Kitty, your intense desire to make friends with
Mademoiselle. . ."

Kitty blushed with pleasure, and slowly, without speaking, pressed her
new friend’s hand, which did not respond to her pressure, but lay
motionless in her hand. The hand did not respond to her pressure, but
the face of Mademoiselle Varenka glowed with a soft, glad, though rather
mournful smile, that showed large but handsome teeth.

After getting to know Varenka, Kitty became more and more fascinated by
her friend, and every day she discovered new virtues in her.

"Kitty plays, and we have a piano; not a good one, it’s true, but you
will give us so much pleasure," said the princess with her affected
smile, which Kitty disliked particularly just then, because she noticed
that Varenka had no inclination to sing. Varenka came, however, in the
evening and brought a roll of music with her. The princess had invited
Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter and the colonel.

Varenka seemed quite unaffected by there being persons present she did
not know, and she went directly to the piano. She could not accompany
herself, but she could sing music at sight very well. Kitty, who played
well, accompanied her.

Kitty looked with pride at her friend. She was enchanted by her talent,
and her voice, and her face, but most of all by her manner, by the way
Varenka obviously thought nothing of her singing and was quite unmoved
by their praises. She seemed only to be asking: "Am I to sing again, or
is that enough?"

"If it had been I," thought Kitty, "how proud I should have been! How
delighted I should have been to see that crowd under the windows! But
she’s utterly unmoved by it. Her only motive is to avoid refusing and to
please mamma. What is there in her? What is it gives her the power to
look down on everything, to be calm independently of everything? How I
should like to know it and to learn it of her!" thought Kitty, gazing
into her serene face. The princess asked Varenka to sing again, and
Varenka sang another song, also smoothly, distinctly, and well, standing
erect at the piano and beating time on it with her thin, dark-skinned
hand.

The next song in the book was an Italian one. Kitty played the opening
bars, and looked round at Varenka.

"Let’s skip that," said Varenka, flushing a little. Kitty let her eyes
rest on Varenka’s face, with a look of dismay and inquiry.

When she had finished, they all thanked her again, and went off to tea.
Kitty and Varenka went out into the little garden that adjoined the
house.

"Am I right, that you have some reminiscences connected with that song?"
said Kitty. "Don’t tell me," she added hastily, "only say if I’m right."

Kitty with big, wide-open eyes gazed silently, sympathetically at
Varenka.

"I cared for him, and he cared for me; but his mother did not wish it,
and he married another girl. He’s living now not far from us, and I see
him sometimes. You didn’t think I had a love story too," she said, and
there was a faint gleam in her handsome face of that fire which Kitty
felt must once have glowed all over her.

"How good you are! how good you are!" cried Kitty, and stopping her, she
kissed her. "If I could only be even a little like you!"

"No, I’m not nice at all. Come, tell me.... Stop a minute, let’s sit
down," said Kitty, making her sit down again beside her. "Tell me, isn’t
it humiliating to think that a man has disdained your love, that he
hasn’t cared for it?..."

"Yes, but if it hadn’t been on account of his mother, if it had been his
own doing?..." said Kitty, feeling she was giving away her secret, and
that her face, burning with the flush of shame, had betrayed her
already.

"In that case he would have done wrong, and I should not have regretted
him," answered Varenka, evidently realizing that they were now talking
not of her, but of Kitty.

"But the humiliation," said Kitty, "the humiliation one can never
forget, can never forget," she said, remembering her look at the last
ball during the pause in the music.

Varenka shook her head and laid her hand on Kitty’s hand.

"Why, what is important?" said Kitty, looking into her face with
inquisitive wonder.

"Oh, so much that’s more important," answered Varenka, not knowing what
to say. But at that instant they heard the princess’s voice from the
window. "Kitty, it’s cold! Either get a shawl, or come indoors."

Kitty held her by the hand, and with passionate curiosity and entreaty
her eyes asked her: "What is it, what is this of such importance that
gives you such tranquillity? You know, tell me!" But Varenka did not
even know what Kitty’s eyes were asking her. She merely thought that she
had to go to see Madame Berthe too that evening, and to make haste home
in time for _maman’s_ tea at twelve o’clock. She went indoors, collected
her music, and saying good-bye to everyone, was about to go.

Kitty saw that Varenka could hardly restrain a smile at the idea that
she needed an escort.

"No, I always go about alone and nothing ever happens to me," she said,
taking her hat. And kissing Kitty once more, without saying what was
important, she stepped out courageously with the music under her arm and
vanished into the twilight of the summer night, bearing away with her
her secret of what was important and what gave her the calm and dignity
so much to be envied.

Kitty made the acquaintance of Madame Stahl too, and this acquaintance,
together with her friendship with Varenka, did not merely exercise a
great influence on her, it also comforted her in her mental distress.
She found this comfort through a completely new world being opened to
her by means of this acquaintance, a world having nothing in common with
her past, an exalted, noble world, from the height of which she could
contemplate her past calmly. It was revealed to her that besides the
instinctive life to which Kitty had given herself up hitherto there was
a spiritual life. This life was disclosed in religion, but a religion
having nothing in common with that one which Kitty had known from
childhood, and which found expression in litanies and all-night services
at the Widow’s Home, where one might meet one’s friends, and in learning
by heart Slavonic texts with the priest. This was a lofty, mysterious
religion connected with a whole series of noble thoughts and feelings,
which one could do more than merely believe because one was told to,
which one could love.

Kitty found all this out not from words. Madame Stahl talked to Kitty as
to a charming child that one looks on with pleasure as on the memory of
one’s youth, and only once she said in passing that in all human sorrows
nothing gives comfort but love and faith, and that in the sight of
Christ’s compassion for us no sorrow is trifling—and immediately talked
of other things. But in every gesture of Madame Stahl, in every word, in
every heavenly—as Kitty called it—look, and above all in the whole story
of her life, which she heard from Varenka, Kitty recognized that
something "that was important," of which, till then, she had known
nothing.

Yet, elevated as Madame Stahl’s character was, touching as was her
story, and exalted and moving as was her speech, Kitty could not help
detecting in her some traits which perplexed her. She noticed that when
questioning her about her family, Madame Stahl had smiled
contemptuously, which was not in accord with Christian meekness. She
noticed, too, that when she had found a Catholic priest with her, Madame
Stahl had studiously kept her face in the shadow of the lamp-shade and
had smiled in a peculiar way. Trivial as these two observations were,
they perplexed her, and she had her doubts as to Madame Stahl. But on
the other hand Varenka, alone in the world, without friends or
relations, with a melancholy disappointment in the past, desiring
nothing, regretting nothing, was just that perfection of which Kitty
dared hardly dream. In Varenka she realized that one has but to forget
oneself and love others, and one will be calm, happy, and noble. And
that was what Kitty longed to be. Seeing now clearly what was _the most
important_, Kitty was not satisfied with being enthusiastic over it; she
at once gave herself up with her whole soul to the new life that was
opening to her. From Varenka’s accounts of the doings of Madame Stahl
and other people whom she mentioned, Kitty had already constructed the
plan of her own future life. She would, like Madame Stahl’s niece,
Aline, of whom Varenka had talked to her a great deal, seek out those
who were in trouble, wherever she might be living, help them as far as
she could, give them the Gospel, read the Gospel to the sick, to
criminals, to the dying. The idea of reading the Gospel to criminals, as
Aline did, particularly fascinated Kitty. But all these were secret
dreams, of which Kitty did not talk either to her mother or to Varenka.

While awaiting the time for carrying out her plans on a large scale,
however, Kitty, even then at the springs, where there were so many
people ill and unhappy, readily found a chance for practicing her new
principles in imitation of Varenka.

At first the princess noticed nothing but that Kitty was much under the
influence of her _engouement_, as she called it, for Madame Stahl, and
still more for Varenka. She saw that Kitty did not merely imitate
Varenka in her conduct, but unconsciously imitated her in her manner of
walking, of talking, of blinking her eyes. But later on the princess
noticed that, apart from this adoration, some kind of serious spiritual
change was taking place in her daughter.

The princess saw that in the evenings Kitty read a French testament that
Madame Stahl had given her—a thing she had never done before; that she
avoided society acquaintances and associated with the sick people who
were under Varenka’s protection, and especially one poor family, that of
a sick painter, Petrov. Kitty was unmistakably proud of playing the part
of a sister of mercy in that family. All this was well enough, and the
princess had nothing to say against it, especially as Petrov’s wife was
a perfectly nice sort of woman, and that the German princess, noticing
Kitty’s devotion, praised her, calling her an angel of consolation. All
this would have been very well, if there had been no exaggeration. But
the princess saw that her daughter was rushing into extremes, and so
indeed she told her.

Her daughter made her no reply, only in her heart she thought that one
could not talk about exaggeration where Christianity was concerned. What
exaggeration could there be in the practice of a doctrine wherein one
was bidden to turn the other cheek when one was smitten, and give one’s
cloak if one’s coat were taken? But the princess disliked this
exaggeration, and disliked even more the fact that she felt her daughter
did not care to show her all her heart. Kitty did in fact conceal her
new views and feelings from her mother. She concealed them not because
she did not respect or did not love her mother, but simply because she
was her mother. She would have revealed them to anyone sooner than to
her mother.

"No, I’ve not noticed it, maman," said Kitty, flushing hotly.

"We’re meaning to make an expedition to the mountains tomorrow,"
answered Kitty.

That day Varenka came to dinner and told them that Anna Pavlovna had
changed her mind and given up the expedition for the morrow. And the
princess noticed again that Kitty reddened.

"Kitty, haven’t you had some misunderstanding with the Petrovs?" said
the princess, when they were left alone. "Why has she given up sending
the children and coming to see us?"

Kitty answered that nothing had happened between them, and that she
could not tell why Anna Pavlovna seemed displeased with her. Kitty
answered perfectly truly. She did not know the reason Anna Pavlovna had
changed to her, but she guessed it. She guessed at something which she
could not tell her mother, which she did not put into words to herself.
It was one of those things which one knows but which one can never speak
of even to oneself, so terrible and shameful would it be to be mistaken.

Again and again she went over in her memory all her relations with the
family. She remembered the simple delight expressed on the round,
good-humored face of Anna Pavlovna at their meetings; she remembered
their secret confabulations about the invalid, their plots to draw him
away from the work which was forbidden him, and to get him out-of-doors;
the devotion of the youngest boy, who used to call her "my Kitty," and
would not go to bed without her. How nice it all was! Then she recalled
the thin, terribly thin figure of Petrov, with his long neck, in his
brown coat, his scant, curly hair, his questioning blue eyes that were
so terrible to Kitty at first, and his painful attempts to seem hearty
and lively in her presence. She recalled the efforts she had made at
first to overcome the repugnance she felt for him, as for all
consumptive people, and the pains it had cost her to think of things to
say to him. She recalled the timid, softened look with which he gazed at
her, and the strange feeling of compassion and awkwardness, and later of
a sense of her own goodness, which she had felt at it. How nice it all
was! But all that was at first. Now, a few days ago, everything was
suddenly spoiled. Anna Pavlovna had met Kitty with affected cordiality,
and had kept continual watch on her and on her husband.

"Yes, perhaps, too, she didn’t like it when I gave him the rug. It was
all so simple, but he took it so awkwardly, and was so long thanking me,
that I felt awkward too. And then that portrait of me he did so well.
And most of all that look of confusion and tenderness! Yes, yes, that’s
it!" Kitty repeated to herself with horror. "No, it can’t be, it
oughtn’t to be! He’s so much to be pitied!" she said to herself directly
after.

The prince returned thinner, with the skin hanging in loose bags on his
cheeks, but in the most cheerful frame of mind. His good humor was even
greater when he saw Kitty completely recovered. The news of Kitty’s
friendship with Madame Stahl and Varenka, and the reports the princess
gave him of some kind of change she had noticed in Kitty, troubled the
prince and aroused his habitual feeling of jealousy of everything that
drew his daughter away from him, and a dread that his daughter might
have got out of the reach of his influence into regions inaccessible to
him. But these unpleasant matters were all drowned in the sea of
kindliness and good humor which was always within him, and more so than
ever since his course of Carlsbad waters.

It was a lovely morning: the bright, cheerful houses with their little
gardens, the sight of the red-faced, red-armed, beer-drinking German
waitresses, working away merrily, did the heart good. But the nearer
they got to the springs the oftener they met sick people; and their
appearance seemed more pitiable than ever among the everyday conditions
of prosperous German life. Kitty was no longer struck by this contrast.
The bright sun, the brilliant green of the foliage, the strains of the
music were for her the natural setting of all these familiar faces, with
their changes to greater emaciation or to convalescence, for which she
watched. But to the prince the brightness and gaiety of the June
morning, and the sound of the orchestra playing a gay waltz then in
fashion, and above all, the appearance of the healthy attendants, seemed
something unseemly and monstrous, in conjunction with these slowly
moving, dying figures gathered together from all parts of Europe. In
spite of his feeling of pride and, as it were, of the return of youth,
with his favorite daughter on his arm, he felt awkward, and almost
ashamed of his vigorous step and his sturdy, stout limbs. He felt almost
like a man not dressed in a crowd.

Kitty mentioned the names of all the people they met, with some of whom
she was acquainted and some not. At the entrance of the garden they met
the blind lady, Madame Berthe, with her guide, and the prince was
delighted to see the old Frenchwoman’s face light up when she heard
Kitty’s voice. She at once began talking to him with French exaggerated
politeness, applauding him for having such a delightful daughter,
extolling Kitty to the skies before her face, and calling her a
treasure, a pearl, and a consoling angel.

"Here is papa come," Kitty said to her.

"Of course I know you; I know you very well," the prince said to her
with a smile, in which Kitty detected with joy that her father liked her
friend. "Where are you off to in such haste?"

"Maman’s here," she said, turning to Kitty. "She has not slept all
night, and the doctor advised her to go out. I’m taking her her work."

Kitty saw that her father had meant to make fun of Varenka, but that he
could not do it because he liked her.

"Why, did you know her, papa?" Kitty asked apprehensively, catching the
gleam of irony that kindled in the prince’s eyes at the mention of
Madame Stahl.

"What is a Pietist, papa?" asked Kitty, dismayed to find that what she
prized so highly in Madame Stahl had a name.

"That’s Petrov, an artist," answered Kitty, blushing. "And that’s his
wife," she added, indicating Anna Pavlovna, who, as though on purpose,
at the very instant they approached walked away after a child that had
run off along a path.

"Well, let us go, then," said Kitty, turning round resolutely. "How are
you feeling today?" she asked Petrov.

"We expected you yesterday, princess," he said to Kitty. He staggered as
he said this, and then repeated the motion, trying to make it seem as if
it had been intentional.

"Yes, papa," answered Kitty. "And you must know they’ve three children,
no servant, and scarcely any means. He gets something from the Academy,"
she went on briskly, trying to drown the distress that the queer change
in Anna Pavlovna’s manner to her had aroused in her.

"Oh, here’s Madame Stahl," said Kitty, indicating an invalid carriage,
where, propped on pillows, something in gray and blue was lying under a
sunshade. This was Madame Stahl. Behind her stood the gloomy,
healthy-looking German workman who pushed the carriage. Close by was
standing a flaxen-headed Swedish count, whom Kitty knew by name. Several
invalids were lingering near the low carriage, staring at the lady as
though she were some curiosity.

The prince went up to her, and Kitty detected that disconcerting gleam
of irony in his eyes. He went up to Madame Stahl, and addressed her with
extreme courtesy and affability in that excellent French that so few
speak nowadays.

"Prince Alexander Shtcherbatsky," said Madame Stahl, lifting upon him
her heavenly eyes, in which Kitty discerned a look of annoyance.
"Delighted! I have taken a great fancy to your daughter."

"Papa, it’s not possible!" cried Kitty.

"Oh, no, papa!" Kitty objected warmly. "Varenka worships her. And then
she does so much good! Ask anyone! Everyone knows her and Aline Stahl."

Kitty did not answer, not because she had nothing to say, but because
she did not care to reveal her secret thoughts even to her father. But,
strange to say, although she had so made up her mind not to be
influenced by her father’s views, not to let him into her inmost
sanctuary, she felt that the heavenly image of Madame Stahl, which she
had carried for a whole month in her heart, had vanished, never to
return, just as the fantastic figure made up of some clothes thrown down
at random vanishes when one sees that it is only some garment lying
there. All that was left was a woman with short legs, who lay down
because she had a bad figure, and worried patient Varenka for not
arranging her rug to her liking. And by no effort of the imagination
could Kitty bring back the former Madame Stahl.

On coming back with Kitty from the springs, the prince, who had asked
the colonel, and Marya Yevgenyevna, and Varenka all to come and have
coffee with them, gave orders for a table and chairs to be taken into
the garden under the chestnut tree, and lunch to be laid there. The
landlord and the servants, too, grew brisker under the influence of his
good spirits. They knew his open-handedness; and half an hour later the
invalid doctor from Hamburg, who lived on the top floor, looked
enviously out of the window at the merry party of healthy Russians
assembled under the chestnut tree. In the trembling circles of shadow
cast by the leaves, at a table, covered with a white cloth, and set with
coffeepot, bread-and-butter, cheese, and cold game, sat the princess in
a high cap with lilac ribbons, distributing cups and bread-and-butter.
At the other end sat the prince, eating heartily, and talking loudly and
merrily. The prince had spread out near him his purchases, carved boxes,
and knick-knacks, paper-knives of all sorts, of which he bought a heap
at every watering-place, and bestowed them upon everyone, including
Lieschen, the servant girl, and the landlord, with whom he jested in his
comically bad German, assuring him that it was not the water had cured
Kitty, but his splendid cookery, especially his plum soup. The princess
laughed at her husband for his Russian ways, but she was more lively and
good-humored than she had been all the while she had been at the waters.
The colonel smiled, as he always did, at the prince’s jokes, but as far
as regards Europe, of which he believed himself to be making a careful
study, he took the princess’s side. The simple-hearted Marya Yevgenyevna
simply roared with laughter at everything absurd the prince said, and
his jokes made Varenka helpless with feeble but infectious laughter,
which was something Kitty had never seen before.

Kitty was glad of all this, but she could not be light-hearted. She
could not solve the problem her father had unconsciously set her by his
goodhumored view of her friends, and of the life that had so attracted
her. To this doubt there was joined the change in her relations with the
Petrovs, which had been so conspicuously and unpleasantly marked that
morning. Everyone was good humored, but Kitty could not feel good
humored, and this increased her distress. She felt a feeling such as she
had known in childhood, when she had been shut in her room as a
punishment, and had heard her sisters’ merry laughter outside.

Kitty followed her. Even Varenka struck her as different. She was not
worse, but different from what she had fancied her before.

Kitty did not speak.

"Mamma meant to go and see the Petrovs. Won’t you be there?" said Kitty,
to try Varenka.

"Why not? why not? why not?" said Kitty, opening her eyes wide, and
clutching at Varenka’s parasol, so as not to let her go. "No, wait a
minute; why not?"

"Everything, everything!" Kitty assented.

"Well, well!" Kitty urged impatiently, looking darkly at Varenka.

Kitty, scowling more than ever, kept silent, and Varenka went on
speaking alone, trying to soften or soothe her, and seeing a storm
coming—she did not know whether of tears or of words.

"And it serves me right! And it serves me right!" Kitty cried quickly,
snatching the parasol out of Varenka’s hand, and looking past her
friend’s face.

But Kitty was in one of her gusts of fury, and she would not let her
finish.

"Kitty," they heard her mother’s voice, "come here, show papa your
necklace."

Kitty, with a haughty air, without making peace with her friend, took
the necklace in a little box from the table and went to her mother.

"She’s still here," she thought. "What am I to say to her? Oh, dear!
what have I done, what have I said? Why was I rude to her? What am I to
do? What am I to say to her?" thought Kitty, and she stopped in the
doorway.

Varenka in her hat and with the parasol in her hands was sitting at the
table examining the spring which Kitty had broken. She lifted her head.

"Varenka, forgive me, do forgive me," whispered Kitty, going up to her.
"I don’t remember what I said. I..."

Peace was made. But with her father’s coming all the world in which she
had been living was transformed for Kitty. She did not give up
everything she had learned, but she became aware that she had deceived
herself in supposing she could be what she wanted to be. Her eyes were,
it seemed, opened; she felt all the difficulty of maintaining herself
without hypocrisy and self-conceit on the pinnacle to which she had
wished to mount. Moreover, she became aware of all the dreariness of the
world of sorrow, of sick and dying people, in which she had been living.
The efforts she had made to like it seemed to her intolerable, and she
felt a longing to get back quickly into the fresh air, to Russia, to
Ergushovo, where, as she knew from letters, her sister Dolly had already
gone with her children.

But her affection for Varenka did not wane. As she said good-bye, Kitty
begged her to come to them in Russia.

"Well, then, I shall be married simply for that. Mind now, remember your
promise," said Kitty.

The doctor’s prediction was fulfilled. Kitty returned home to Russia
cured. She was not so gay and thoughtless as before, but she was serene.
Her Moscow troubles had become a memory to her.

In spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s efforts to be an attentive father and
husband, he never could keep in his mind that he had a wife and
children. He had bachelor tastes, and it was in accordance with them
that he shaped his life. On his return to Moscow he informed his wife
with pride that everything was ready, that the house would be a little
paradise, and that he advised her most certainly to go. His wife’s
staying away in the country was very agreeable to Stepan Arkadyevitch
from every point of view: it did the children good, it decreased
expenses, and it left him more at liberty. Darya Alexandrovna regarded
staying in the country for the summer as essential for the children,
especially for the little girl, who had not succeeded in regaining her
strength after the scarlatina, and also as a means of escaping the petty
humiliations, the little bills owing to the wood-merchant, the
fishmonger, the shoemaker, which made her miserable. Besides this, she
was pleased to go away to the country because she was dreaming of
getting her sister Kitty to stay with her there. Kitty was to be back
from abroad in the middle of the summer, and bathing had been prescribed
for her. Kitty wrote that no prospect was so alluring as to spend the
summer with Dolly at Ergushovo, full of childish associations for both
of them.

After dinner, Darya Alexandrovna, sitting alone with him on the balcony,
began to speak of Kitty.

"You know, Kitty’s coming here, and is going to spend the summer with
me."

He talked of this, and passionately longed to hear more of Kitty, and,
at the same time, was afraid of hearing it. He dreaded the breaking up
of the inward peace he had gained with such effort.

She had by now got her household matters so satisfactorily arranged,
thanks to Marya Philimonovna, that she was disinclined to make any
change in them; besides, she had no faith in Levin’s knowledge of
farming. General principles, as to the cow being a machine for the
production of milk, she looked on with suspicion. It seemed to her that
such principles could only be a hindrance in farm management. It all
seemed to her a far simpler matter: all that was needed, as Marya
Philimonovna had explained, was to give Brindle and Whitebreast more
food and drink, and not to let the cook carry all the kitchen slops to
the laundry maid’s cow. That was clear. But general propositions as to
feeding on meal and on grass were doubtful and obscure. And, what was
most important, she wanted to talk about Kitty.

"Kitty writes to me that there’s nothing she longs for so much as quiet
and solitude," Dolly said after the silence that had followed.

"Let me ask you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said Darya Alexandrovna,
smiling her kindly and rather mocking smile, "why is it you are angry
with Kitty?"

"You know I made an offer and that I was refused," said Levin, and all
the tenderness he had been feeling for Kitty a minute before was
replaced by a feeling of anger for the slight he had suffered.

"Ah, pride, pride!" said Darya Alexandrovna, as though despising him for
the baseness of this feeling in comparison with that other feeling which
only women know. "At the time when you made Kitty an offer she was just
in a position in which she could not answer. She was in doubt. Doubt
between you and Vronsky. Him she was seeing every day, and you she had
not seen for a long while. Supposing she had been older ... I, for
instance, in her place could have felt no doubt. I always disliked him,
and so it has turned out."

Levin recalled Kitty’s answer. She had said: "_No, that cannot be_..."

"How absurd you are!" said Darya Alexandrovna, looking with mournful
tenderness at Levin’s excitement. "Yes, I see it all more and more
clearly," she went on musingly. "So you won’t come to see us, then, when
Kitty’s here?"

He could not be mistaken. There were no other eyes like those in the
world. There was only one creature in the world that could concentrate
for him all the brightness and meaning of life. It was she. It was
Kitty. He understood that she was driving to Ergushovo from the railway
station. And everything that had been stirring Levin during that
sleepless night, all the resolutions he had made, all vanished at once.
He recalled with horror his dreams of marrying a peasant girl. There
only, in the carriage that had crossed over to the other side of the
road, and was rapidly disappearing, there only could he find the
solution of the riddle of his life, which had weighed so agonizingly
upon him of late.

To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-five miles off, of
Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, whom he longed to see and could not see. Darya
Alexandrovna Oblonskaya had invited him, when he was over there, to
come; to come with the object of renewing his offer to her sister, who
would, so she gave him to understand, accept him now. Levin himself had
felt on seeing Kitty Shtcherbatskaya that he had never ceased to love
her; but he could not go over to the Oblonskys’, knowing she was there.
The fact that he had made her an offer, and she had refused him, had
placed an insuperable barrier between her and him. "I can’t ask her to
be my wife merely because she can’t be the wife of the man she wanted to
marry," he said to himself. The thought of this made him cold and
hostile to her. "I should not be able to speak to her without a feeling
of reproach; I could not look at her without resentment; and she will
only hate me all the more, as she’s bound to. And besides, how can I
now, after what Darya Alexandrovna told me, go to see them? Can I help
showing that I know what she told me? And me to go magnanimously to
forgive her, and have pity on her! Me go through a performance before
her of forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!... What induced
Darya Alexandrovna to tell me that? By chance I might have seen her,
then everything would have happened of itself; but, as it is, it’s out
of the question, out of the question!"

Darya Alexandrovna sent him a letter, asking him for a side-saddle for
Kitty’s use. "I’m told you have a side-saddle," she wrote to him; "I
hope you will bring it over yourself."

Sviazhsky was the marshal of his district. He was five years older than
Levin, and had long been married. His sister-in-law, a young girl Levin
liked very much, lived in his house; and Levin knew that Sviazhsky and
his wife would have greatly liked to marry the girl to him. He knew this
with certainty, as so-called eligible young men always know it, though
he could never have brought himself to speak of it to anyone; and he
knew too that, although he wanted to get married, and although by every
token this very attractive girl would make an excellent wife, he could
no more have married her, even if he had not been in love with Kitty
Shtcherbatskaya, than he could have flown up to the sky. And this
knowledge poisoned the pleasure he had hoped to find in the visit to
Sviazhsky.

After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought with
exceptional vividness of Kitty, her refusal, and their last meeting. He
got up and began walking about the room.

Three days after his brother’s departure, Levin too set off for his
foreign tour. Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in the
railway train, Levin greatly astonished him by his depression.

Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still better he liked to give a
dinner, small, but very choice, both as regards the food and drink and
as regards the selection of guests. He particularly liked the program of
that day’s dinner. There would be fresh perch, asparagus, and _la pièce
de resistance_—first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef, and wines to
suit: so much for the eating and drinking. Kitty and Levin would be of
the party, and that this might not be obtrusively evident, there would
be a girl cousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and _la pièce de
resistance_ among the guests—Sergey Koznishev and Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch was a Moscow man, and a philosopher; Alexey
Alexandrovitch a Petersburger, and a practical politician. He was
asking, too, the well-known eccentric enthusiast, Pestsov, a liberal, a
great talker, a musician, an historian, and the most delightfully
youthful person of fifty, who would be a sauce or garnish for Koznishev
and Karenin. He would provoke them and set them off.

"You don’t mean to say he’s here?" said Levin, and he wanted to inquire
about Kitty. He had heard at the beginning of the winter that she was at
Petersburg with her sister, the wife of the diplomat, and he did not
know whether she had come back or not; but he changed his mind and did
not ask. "Whether she’s coming or not, I don’t care," he said to
himself.

They were just going in at the door, talking of the weather, when Stepan
Arkadyevitch overtook them. In the drawing room there were already
sitting Prince Alexander Dmitrievitch Shtcherbatsky, young
Shtcherbatsky, Turovtsin, Kitty, and Karenin.

Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were not going well in
the drawing-room without him. Darya Alexandrovna, in her best gray silk
gown, obviously worried about the children, who were to have their
dinner by themselves in the nursery, and by her husband’s absence, was
not equal to the task of making the party mix without him. All were
sitting like so many priests’ wives on a visit (so the old prince
expressed it), obviously wondering why they were there, and pumping up
remarks simply to avoid being silent. Turovtsin—good, simple man—felt
unmistakably a fish out of water, and the smile with which his thick
lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitch said, as plainly as words: "Well, old
boy, you have popped me down in a learned set! A drinking party now, or
the _Château des Fleurs_, would be more in my line!" The old prince sat
in silence, his bright little eyes watching Karenin from one side, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw that he had already formed a phrase to sum up
that politician of whom guests were invited to partake as though he were
a sturgeon. Kitty was looking at the door, calling up all her energies
to keep her from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin. Young
Shtcherbatsky, who had not been introduced to Karenin, was trying to
look as though he were not in the least conscious of it. Karenin himself
had followed the Petersburg fashion for a dinner with ladies and was
wearing evening dress and a white tie. Stepan Arkadyevitch saw by his
face that he had come simply to keep his promise, and was performing a
disagreeable duty in being present at this gathering. He was indeed the
person chiefly responsible for the chill benumbing all the guests before
Stepan Arkadyevitch came in.

On entering the drawing room Stepan Arkadyevitch apologized, explaining
that he had been detained by that prince, who was always the scapegoat
for all his absences and unpunctualities, and in one moment he had made
all the guests acquainted with each other, and, bringing together Alexey
Alexandrovitch and Sergey Koznishev, started them on a discussion of the
Russification of Poland, into which they immediately plunged with
Pestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on the shoulder, he whispered something
comic in his ear, and set him down by his wife and the old prince. Then
he told Kitty she was looking very pretty that evening, and presented
Shtcherbatsky to Karenin. In a moment he had so kneaded together the
social dough that the drawing room became very lively, and there was a
merry buzz of voices. Konstantin Levin was the only person who had not
arrived. But this was so much the better, as going into the dining room,
Stepan Arkadyevitch found to his horror that the port and sherry had
been procured from Deprè, and not from Levy, and, directing that the
coachman should be sent off as speedily as possible to Levy’s, he was
going back to the drawing room.

"All our own set. Kitty’s here. Come along, I’ll introduce you to
Karenin."

Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all his liberal views, was well aware that to
meet Karenin was sure to be felt a flattering distinction, and so
treated his best friends to this honor. But at that instant Konstantin
Levin was not in a condition to feel all the gratification of making
such an acquaintance. He had not seen Kitty since that memorable evening
when he met Vronsky, not counting, that is, the moment when he had had a
glimpse of her on the highroad. He had known at the bottom of his heart
that he would see her here today. But to keep his thoughts free, he had
tried to persuade himself that he did not know it. Now when he heard
that she was here, he was suddenly conscious of such delight, and at the
same time of such dread, that his breath failed him and he could not
utter what he wanted to say.

"You have killed a bear, I’ve been told!" said Kitty, trying assiduously
to catch with her fork a perverse mushroom that would slip away, and
setting the lace quivering over her white arm. "Are there bears on your
place?" she added, turning her charming little head to him and smiling.

Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as though
there were no other places left, Stepan Arkadyevitch put Levin and Kitty
side by side.

Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin. At first,
when they were talking of the influence that one people has on another,
there rose to Levin’s mind what he had to say on the subject. But these
ideas, once of such importance in his eyes, seemed to come into his
brain as in a dream, and had now not the slightest interest for him. It
even struck him as strange that they should be so eager to talk of what
was of no use to anyone. Kitty, too, should, one would have supposed,
have been interested in what they were saying of the rights and
education of women. How often she had mused on the subject, thinking of
her friend abroad, Varenka, of her painful state of dependence, how
often she had wondered about herself what would become of her if she did
not marry, and how often she had argued with her sister about it! But it
did not interest her at all. She and Levin had a conversation of their
own, yet not a conversation, but some sort of mysterious communication,
which brought them every moment nearer, and stirred in both a sense of
glad terror before the unknown into which they were entering.

At first Levin, in answer to Kitty’s question how he could have seen her
last year in the carriage, told her how he had been coming home from the
mowing along the highroad and had met her.

"Have you known him long?" asked Kitty.

"Oh, you’re wrong! And you must give up thinking so directly!" said
Kitty. "I used to have a very poor opinion of him too, but he, he’s an
awfully nice and wonderfully good-hearted man. He has a heart of gold."

When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kitty into
the drawing room; but he was afraid she might dislike this, as too
obviously paying her attention. He remained in the little ring of men,
taking part in the general conversation, and without looking at Kitty,
he was aware of her movements, her looks, and the place where she was in
the drawing room.

Shtcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kitty, going up to a card table,
sat down, and, taking up the chalk, began drawing diverging circles over
the new green cloth.

"No," said Kitty, blushing, but looking at him all the more boldly with
her truthful eyes; "a girl may be so circumstanced that she cannot live
in the family without humiliation, while she herself..."

And he saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at dinner of the
liberty of woman, simply from getting a glimpse of the terror of an old
maid’s existence and its humiliation in Kitty’s heart; and loving her,
he felt that terror and humiliation, and at once gave up his arguments.

Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by her
conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch when she caught sight of the two
figures: Kitty with the chalk in her hand, with a shy and happy smile
looking upwards at Levin, and his handsome figure bending over the table
with glowing eyes fastened one minute on the table and the next on her.
He was suddenly radiant: he had understood. It meant, "Then I could not
answer differently."

Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.

When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt such uneasiness
without her, and such an impatient longing to get as quickly, as quickly
as possible, to tomorrow morning, when he would see her again and be
plighted to her forever, that he felt afraid, as though of death, of
those fourteen hours that he had to get through without her. It was
essential for him to be with someone to talk to, so as not to be left
alone, to kill time. Stepan Arkadyevitch would have been the companion
most congenial to him, but he was going out, he said, to a _soirée_, in
reality to the ballet. Levin only had time to tell him he was happy, and
that he loved him, and would never, never forget what he had done for
him. The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed Levin that he
comprehended that feeling fittingly.

Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him, gave him a sort of
congratulation, saying, "How glad I am you have met Kitty again! One
must value old friends." Levin did not like these words of Darya
Alexandrovna’s. She could not understand how lofty and beyond her it all
was, and she ought not to have dared to allude to it. Levin said
good-bye to them, but, not to be left alone, he attached himself to his
brother.

"So it is all settled! I am glad. Love her. I am glad.... Kitty!"

"Papa!" shrieked Kitty, and shut his mouth with her hands.

He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, her face again, and made
the sign of the cross over her.

And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man, till then
so little known to him, when he saw how slowly and tenderly Kitty kissed
his muscular hand.

The princess sat in her armchair, silent and smiling; the prince sat
down beside her. Kitty stood by her father’s chair, still holding his
hand. All were silent.

"Will there really be a trousseau and all that?" Levin thought with
horror. "But can the trousseau and the benediction and all that—can it
spoil my happiness? Nothing can spoil it!" He glanced at Kitty, and
noticed that she was not in the least, not in the very least, disturbed
by the idea of the trousseau. "Then it must be all right," he thought.

And at the confectioner’s, and at Fomin’s, and at Foulde’s he saw that
he was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and prided
themselves on his happiness, just as every one whom he had to do with
during those days. What was extraordinary was that everyone not only
liked him, but even people previously unsympathetic, cold, and callous,
were enthusiastic over him, gave way to him in everything, treated his
feeling with tenderness and delicacy, and shared his conviction that he
was the happiest man in the world because his betrothed was beyond
perfection. Kitty too felt the same thing. When Countess Nordston
ventured to hint that she had hoped for something better, Kitty was so
angry and proved so conclusively that nothing in the world could be
better than Levin, that Countess Nordston had to admit it, and in
Kitty’s presence never met Levin without a smile of ecstatic admiration.

The confession he had promised was the one painful incident of this
time. He consulted the old prince, and with his sanction gave Kitty his
diary, in which there was written the confession that tortured him. He
had written this diary at the time with a view to his future wife. Two
things caused him anguish: his lack of purity and his lack of faith. His
confession of unbelief passed unnoticed. She was religious, had never
doubted the truths of religion, but his external unbelief did not affect
her in the least. Through love she knew all his soul, and in his soul
she saw what she wanted, and that such a state of soul should be called
unbelieving was to her a matter of no account. The other confession set
her weeping bitterly.

Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it seemed
to him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and sole aim of
all existence, and that he need not now think or care about anything,
that everything was being done and would be done for him by others. He
had not even plans and aims for the future, he left its arrangement to
others, knowing that everything would be delightful. His brother Sergey
Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided him in doing
what he had to do. All he did was to agree entirely with everything
suggested to him. His brother raised money for him, the princess advised
him to leave Moscow after the wedding. Stepan Arkadyevitch advised him
to go abroad. He agreed to everything. "Do what you choose, if it amuses
you. I’m happy, and my happiness can be no greater and no less for
anything you do," he thought. When he told Kitty of Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s advice that they should go abroad, he was much surprised
that she did not agree to this, and had some definite requirements of
her own in regard to their future. She knew Levin had work he loved in
the country. She did not, as he saw, understand this work, she did not
even care to understand it. But that did not prevent her from regarding
it as a matter of great importance. And then she knew their home would
be in the country, and she wanted to go, not abroad where she was not
going to live, but to the place where their home would be. This
definitely expressed purpose astonished Levin. But since he did not care
either way, he immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it were
his duty, to go down to the country and to arrange everything there to
the best of his ability with the taste of which he had so much.

"You can go, Dunyasha, I’ll call you presently," said Kitty. "Kostya,
what’s the matter?" she asked, definitely adopting this familiar name as
soon as the maid had gone out. She noticed his strange face, agitated
and gloomy, and a panic came over her.

"Kitty! I’m in torture. I can’t suffer alone," he said with despair in
his voice, standing before her and looking imploringly into her eyes. He
saw already from her loving, truthful face, that nothing could come of
what he had meant to say, but yet he wanted her to reassure him herself.
"I’ve come to say that there’s still time. This can all be stopped and
set right."

When the princess came into the room five minutes later, she found them
completely reconciled. Kitty had not simply assured him that she loved
him, but had gone so far—in answer to his question, what she loved him
for—as to explain what for. She told him that she loved him because she
understood him completely, because she knew what he would like, and
because everything he liked was good. And this seemed to him perfectly
clear. When the princess came to them, they were sitting side by side on
the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty’s wanting to
give Dunyasha the brown dress she had been wearing when Levin proposed
to her, while he insisted that that dress must never be given away, but
Dunyasha must have the blue one.

Hearing why he had come, the princess was half humorously, half
seriously angry with him, and sent him home to dress and not to hinder
Kitty’s hair-dressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was just coming.

The head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of his time,
coughed impatiently, making the window-panes quiver in their frames. In
the choir the bored choristers could be heard trying their voices and
blowing their noses. The priest was continually sending first the beadle
and then the deacon to find out whether the bridegroom had not come,
more and more often he went himself, in a lilac vestment and an
embroidered sash, to the side door, expecting to see the bridegroom. At
last one of the ladies, glancing at her watch, said, "It really is
strange, though!" and all the guests became uneasy and began loudly
expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction. One of the bridegroom’s
best men went to find out what had happened. Kitty meanwhile had long
ago been quite ready, and in her white dress and long veil and wreath of
orange blossoms she was standing in the drawing-room of the
Shtcherbatskys’ house with her sister, Madame Lvova, who was her
bridal-mother. She was looking out of the window, and had been for over
half an hour anxiously expecting to hear from the best man that her
bridegroom was at the church.

Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on receiving
instructions to pack up everything and send it round to the
Shtcherbatskys’ house, from which the young people were to set out the
same evening, he had done so, packing everything but the dress suit. The
shirt worn since the morning was crumpled and out of the question with
the fashionable open waistcoat. It was a long way to send to the
Shtcherbatskys’. They sent out to buy a shirt. The servant came back;
everything was shut up—it was Sunday. They sent to Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
and brought a shirt—it was impossibly wide and short. They sent finally
to the Shtcherbatskys’ to unpack the things. The bridegroom was expected
at the church while he was pacing up and down his room like a wild beast
in a cage, peeping out into the corridor, and with horror and despair
recalling what absurd things he had said to Kitty and what she might be
thinking now.

"Kitty, mind you’re the first to step on the carpet," said Countess
Nordston, coming up. "You’re a nice person!" she said to Levin.

"Are you cold? You’re pale. Stop a minute, stoop down," said Kitty’s
sister, Madame Lvova, and with her plump, handsome arms she smilingly
set straight the flowers on her head.

Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.

It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected of
him. For a long time they tried to set him right and made him begin
again—because he kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrong
arm—till he understood at last that what he had to do was, without
changing his position, to take her right hand in his right hand. When at
last he had taken the bride’s hand in the correct way, the priest walked
a few paces in front of them and stopped at the lectern. The crowd of
friends and relations moved after them, with a buzz of talk and a rustle
of skirts. Someone stooped down and pulled out the bride’s train. The
church became so still that the drops of wax could be heard falling from
the candles.

The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and holding them
sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he turned, facing the
bridal pair. The priest was the same old man that had confessed Levin.
He looked with weary and melancholy eyes at the bride and bridegroom,
sighed, and putting his right hand out from his vestment, blessed the
bridegroom with it, and also with a shade of solicitous tenderness laid
the crossed fingers on the bowed head of Kitty. Then he gave them the
candles, and taking the censer, moved slowly away from them.

Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty took
Kitty’s little ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it on the first
joint of his finger. "The servant of God, Konstantin, plights his troth
to the servant of God, Ekaterina." And putting his big ring on Kitty’s
touchingly weak, pink little finger, the priest said the same thing.

And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they had to
do, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by the priest in
a whisper. At last, having duly performed the ceremony, having signed
the rings with the cross, the priest handed Kitty the big ring, and
Levin the little one. Again they were puzzled, and passed the rings from
hand to hand, still without doing what was expected.

Princess Tcharskaya only answered with a smile. She looked at Kitty,
thinking how and when she would stand with Count Siniavin in Kitty’s
place, and how she would remind him then of his joke today.

Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame Nikolaeva, that he
meant to put the crown on Kitty’s chignon for luck.

"Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug first. I warned
Kitty."

Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer. She was
deeply moved. The tears stood in her eyes, and she could not have spoken
without crying. She was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin; going back in
thought to her own wedding, she glanced at the radiant figure of Stepan
Arkadyevitch, forgot all the present, and remembered only her own
innocent love. She recalled not herself only, but all her women-friends
and acquaintances. She thought of them on the one day of their triumph,
when they had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown, with love and
hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and stepping
forward into the mysterious future. Among the brides that came back to
her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose proposed
divorce she had just been hearing. And she had stood just as innocent in
orange flowers and bridal veil. And now? "It’s terribly strange," she
said to herself. It was not merely the sisters, the women-friends and
female relations of the bride who were following every detail of the
ceremony. Women who were quite strangers, mere spectators, were watching
it excitedly, holding their breath, in fear of losing a single movement
or expression of the bride and bridegroom, and angrily not answering,
often not hearing, the remarks of the callous men, who kept making
joking or irrelevant observations.

When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread before
the lectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink silken stuff,
the choir sang a complicated and elaborate psalm, in which the bass and
tenor sang responses to one another, and the priest turning round
pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk rug. Though both had often
heard a great deal about the saying that the one who steps first on the
rug will be the head of the house, neither Levin nor Kitty were capable
of recollecting it, as they took the few steps towards it. They did not
hear the loud remarks and disputes that followed, some maintaining he
had stepped on first, and others that both had stepped on together.

After the customary questions, whether they desired to enter upon
matrimony, and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and their
answers, which sounded strange to themselves, a new ceremony began.
Kitty listened to the words of the prayer, trying to make out their
meaning, but she could not. The feeling of triumph and radiant happiness
flooded her soul more and more as the ceremony went on, and deprived her
of all power of attention.

They prayed: "Endow them with continence and fruitfulness, and vouchsafe
that their hearts may rejoice looking upon their sons and daughters."
They alluded to God’s creation of a wife from Adam’s rib "and for this
cause a man shall leave father and mother, and cleave unto his wife, and
they two shall be one flesh," and that "this is a great mystery"; they
prayed that God would make them fruitful and bless them, like Isaac and
Rebecca, Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and that they might look upon their
children’s children. "That’s all splendid," thought Kitty, catching the
words, "all that’s just as it should be," and a smile of happiness,
unconsciously reflected in everyone who looked at her, beamed on her
radiant face.

Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling over
the bride’s train, smiling too and seeming delighted at something, were
at one moment left behind, at the next treading on the bridal pair as
the priest came to a halt. The spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed to
have infected everyone in the church. It seemed to Levin that the priest
and the deacon too wanted to smile just as he did.

Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer and
congratulated the young people. Levin looked at Kitty, and he had never
before seen her look as she did. She was charming with the new radiance
of happiness in her face. Levin longed to say something to her, but he
did not know whether it was all over. The priest got him out of his
difficulty. He smiled his kindly smile and said gently, "Kiss your wife,
and you kiss your husband," and took the candles out of their hands.

As a bachelor, when he had watched other people’s married life, seen the
petty cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, he had only smiled
contemptuously in his heart. In his future married life there could be,
he was convinced, nothing of that sort; even the external forms, indeed,
he fancied, must be utterly unlike the life of others in everything. And
all of a sudden, instead of his life with his wife being made on an
individual pattern, it was, on the contrary, entirely made up of the
pettiest details, which he had so despised before, but which now, by no
will of his own, had gained an extraordinary importance that it was
useless to contend against. And Levin saw that the organization of all
these details was by no means so easy as he had fancied before. Although
Levin believed himself to have the most exact conceptions of domestic
life, unconsciously, like all men, he pictured domestic life as the
happiest enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder and no petty cares to
distract. He ought, as he conceived the position, to do his work, and to
find repose from it in the happiness of love. She ought to be beloved,
and nothing more. But, like all men, he forgot that she too would want
work. And he was surprised that she, his poetic, exquisite Kitty, could,
not merely in the first weeks, but even in the first days of their
married life, think, remember, and busy herself about tablecloths, and
furniture, about mattresses for visitors, about a tray, about the cook,
and the dinner, and so on. While they were still engaged, he had been
struck by the definiteness with which she had declined the tour abroad
and decided to go into the country, as though she knew of something she
wanted, and could still think of something outside her love. This had
jarred upon him then, and now her trivial cares and anxieties jarred
upon him several times. But he saw that this was essential for her. And,
loving her as he did, though he did not understand the reason of them,
and jeered at these domestic pursuits, he could not help admiring them.
He jeered at the way in which she arranged the furniture they had
brought from Moscow; rearranged their room; hung up curtains; prepared
rooms for visitors; a room for Dolly; saw after an abode for her new
maid; ordered dinner of the old cook; came into collision with Agafea
Mihalovna, taking from her the charge of the stores. He saw how the old
cook smiled, admiring her, and listening to her inexperienced,
impossible orders, how mournfully and tenderly Agafea Mihalovna shook
her head over the young mistress’s new arrangements. He saw that Kitty
was extraordinarily sweet when, laughing and crying, she came to tell
him that her maid, Masha, was used to looking upon her as her young
lady, and so no one obeyed her. It seemed to him sweet, but strange, and
he thought it would have been better without this.

This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin’s ideal of
exalted happiness, was at first one of the disappointments; and this
sweet care of her household, the aim of which he did not understand, but
could not help loving, was one of the new happy surprises.

"You see, your good lady’s settled me here, told me to sit a bit with
her," said Agafea Mihalovna, smiling affectionately at Kitty.

In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the final act of the
drama which had been enacted of late between her and Kitty. He saw that,
in spite of Agafea Mihalovna’s feelings being hurt by a new mistress
taking the reins of government out of her hands, Kitty had yet conquered
her and made her love her.

"Here, I opened your letter too," said Kitty, handing him an illiterate
letter. "It’s from that woman, I think, your brother’s..." she said. "I
did not read it through. This is from my people and from Dolly. Fancy!
Dolly took Tanya and Grisha to a children’s ball at the Sarmatskys’:
Tanya was a French marquise."

"Read this; Dolly writes about you," Kitty was beginning, with a smile;
but she stopped suddenly, noticing the changed expression on her
husband’s face.

Kitty’s face changed at once. Thoughts of Tanya as a marquise, of Dolly,
all had vanished.

"Kitty! What are you thinking of?" he said reproachfully.

Agafea Mihalovna, seeing that it was coming to a quarrel, gently put
down her cup and withdrew. Kitty did not even notice her. The tone in
which her husband had said the last words wounded her, especially
because he evidently did not believe what she had said.

"Kitty! Don’t get angry. But just think a little: this is a matter of
such importance that I can’t bear to think that you should bring in a
feeling of weakness, of dislike to being left alone. Come, you’ll be
dull alone, so go and stay at Moscow a little."

He began to speak, trying to find words not to dissuade but simply to
soothe her. But she did not heed him, and would not agree to anything.
He bent down to her and took her hand, which resisted him. He kissed her
hand, kissed her hair, kissed her hand again—still she was silent. But
when he took her face in both his hands and said "Kitty!" she suddenly
recovered herself, and began to cry, and they were reconciled.

It was decided that they should go together the next day. Levin told his
wife that he believed she wanted to go simply in order to be of use,
agreed that Marya Nikolaevna’s being with his brother did not make her
going improper, but he set off at the bottom of his heart dissatisfied
both with her and with himself. He was dissatisfied with her for being
unable to make up her mind to let him go when it was necessary (and how
strange it was for him to think that he, so lately hardly daring to
believe in such happiness as that she could love him—now was unhappy
because she loved him too much!), and he was dissatisfied with himself
for not showing more strength of will. Even greater was the feeling of
disagreement at the bottom of his heart as to her not needing to
consider the woman who was with his brother, and he thought with horror
of all the contingencies they might meet with. The mere idea of his
wife, his Kitty, being in the same room with a common wench, set him
shuddering with horror and loathing.

But as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened and Kitty peeped
out. Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with his wife, who had
put herself and him in such a difficult position; but Marya Nikolaevna
crimsoned still more. She positively shrank together and flushed to the
point of tears, and clutching the ends of her apron in both hands,
twisted them in her red fingers without knowing what to say and what to
do.

For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in the
eyes with which Kitty looked at this awful woman, so incomprehensible to
her; but it lasted only a single instant.

"Well then, come in," said Kitty, turning to Marya Nikolaevna, who had
recovered herself, but noticing her husband’s face of dismay, "or go on;
go, and then come for me," she said, and went back into the room.

"Well, how is he?" Kitty asked with a frightened face.

Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully at her
husband; then she went up and took him by the elbow with both hands.

Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his composure, and completely
forgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went again in to his
brother with Kitty.

Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her husband, showing him a
valorous and sympathetic face, Kitty went into the sick-room, and,
turning without haste, noiselessly closed the door. With inaudible steps
she went quickly to the sick man’s bedside, and going up so that he had
not to turn his head, she immediately clasped in her fresh young hand
the skeleton of his huge hand, pressed it, and began speaking with that
soft eagerness, sympathetic and not jarring, which is peculiar to women.

But Kitty thought, and felt, and acted quite differently. On seeing the
sick man, she pitied him. And pity in her womanly heart did not arouse
at all that feeling of horror and loathing that it aroused in her
husband, but a desire to act, to find out all the details of his state,
and to remedy them. And since she had not the slightest doubt that it
was her duty to help him, she had no doubt either that it was possible,
and immediately set to work. The very details, the mere thought of which
reduced her husband to terror, immediately engaged her attention. She
sent for the doctor, sent to the chemist’s, set the maid who had come
with her and Marya Nikolaevna to sweep and dust and scrub; she herself
washed up something, washed out something else, laid something under the
quilt. Something was by her directions brought into the sick-room,
something else was carried out. She herself went several times to her
room, regardless of the men she met in the corridor, got out and brought
in sheets, pillow cases, towels, and shirts.

The waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the dining
hall, came several times with an irate countenance in answer to her
summons, and could not avoid carrying out her orders, as she gave them
with such gracious insistence that there was no evading her. Levin did
not approve of all this; he did not believe it would be of any good to
the patient. Above all, he feared the patient would be angry at it. But
the sick man, though he seemed and was indifferent about it, was not
angry, but only abashed, and on the whole as it were interested in what
she was doing with him. Coming back from the doctor to whom Kitty had
sent him, Levin, on opening the door, came upon the sick man at the
instant when, by Kitty’s directions, they were changing his linen. The
long white ridge of his spine, with the huge, prominent shoulder blades
and jutting ribs and vertebrae, was bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and the
waiter were struggling with the sleeve of the night shirt, and could not
get the long, limp arm into it. Kitty, hurriedly closing the door after
Levin, was not looking that way; but the sick man groaned, and she moved
rapidly towards him.

"What say?" queried Marya Nikolaevna. But Kitty heard and saw he was
ashamed and uncomfortable at being naked before her.

Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick man settled comfortably
and everything about him completely changed. The heavy smell was
replaced by the smell of aromatic vinegar, which Kitty with pouting lips
and puffed-out, rosy cheeks was squirting through a little pipe. There
was no dust visible anywhere, a rug was laid by the bedside. On the
table stood medicine bottles and decanters tidily arranged, and the
linen needed was folded up there, and Kitty’s _broderie anglaise_. On
the other table by the patient’s bed there were candles and drink and
powders. The sick man himself, washed and combed, lay in clean sheets on
high raised pillows, in a clean night-shirt with a white collar about
his astoundingly thin neck, and with a new expression of hope looked
fixedly at Kitty.

"I’m much better already," he said. "Why, with you I should have got
well long ago. How nice it is!" he took her hand and drew it towards his
lips, but as though afraid she would dislike it he changed his mind, let
it go, and only stroked it. Kitty took his hand in both hers and pressed
it.

No one could make out what he said but Kitty; she alone understood. She
understood because she was all the while mentally keeping watch on what
he needed.

Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that terrible body, to
take hold of that under the quilt, of which he preferred to know
nothing, under his wife’s influence he made his resolute face that she
knew so well, and putting his arms into the bed took hold of the body,
but in spite of his own strength he was struck by the strange heaviness
of those powerless limbs. While he was turning him over, conscious of
the huge emaciated arm about his neck, Kitty swiftly and noiselessly
turned the pillow, beat it up and settled in it the sick man’s head,
smoothing back his hair, which was sticking again to his moist brow.

More than that, he did not know what to say, how to look, how to move.
To talk of outside things seemed to him shocking, impossible, to talk of
death and depressing subjects—also impossible. To be silent, also
impossible. "If I look at him he will think I am studying him, I am
afraid; if I don’t look at him, he’ll think I’m thinking of other
things. If I walk on tiptoe, he will be vexed; to tread firmly, I’m
ashamed." Kitty evidently did not think of herself, and had no time to
think about herself: she was thinking about him because she knew
something, and all went well. She told him about herself even and about
her wedding, and smiled and sympathized with him and petted him, and
talked of cases of recovery and all went well; so then she must know.
The proof that her behavior and Agafea Mihalovna’s was not instinctive,
animal, irrational, was that apart from the physical treatment, the
relief of suffering, both Agafea Mihalovna and Kitty required for the
dying man something else more important than the physical treatment, and
something which had nothing in common with physical conditions. Agafea
Mihalovna, speaking of the man just dead, had said: "Well, thank God, he
took the sacrament and received absolution; God grant each one of us
such a death." Katya in just the same way, besides all her care about
linen, bedsores, drink, found time the very first day to persuade the
sick man of the necessity of taking the sacrament and receiving
absolution.

On getting back from the sick-room to their own two rooms for the night,
Levin sat with hanging head not knowing what to do. Not to speak of
supper, of preparing for bed, of considering what they were going to do,
he could not even talk to his wife; he was ashamed to. Kitty, on the
contrary, was more active than usual. She was even livelier than usual.
She ordered supper to be brought, herself unpacked their things, and
herself helped to make the beds, and did not even forget to sprinkle
them with Persian powder. She showed that alertness, that swiftness of
reflection comes out in men before a battle, in conflict, in the
dangerous and decisive moments of life—those moments when a man shows
once and for all his value, and that all his past has not been wasted
but has been a preparation for these moments.

"But we have many days before us; we must go to bed," said Kitty,
glancing at her tiny watch.

The next day the sick man received the sacrament and extreme unction.
During the ceremony Nikolay Levin prayed fervently. His great eyes,
fastened on the holy image that was set out on a card table covered with
a colored napkin, expressed such passionate prayer and hope that it was
awful to Levin to see it. Levin knew that this passionate prayer and
hope would only make him feel more bitterly parting from the life he so
loved. Levin knew his brother and the workings of his intellect: he knew
that his unbelief came not from life being easier for him without faith,
but had grown up because step by step the contemporary scientific
interpretation of natural phenomena crushed out the possibility of
faith; and so he knew that his present return was not a legitimate one,
brought about by way of the same working of his intellect, but simply a
temporary, interested return to faith in a desperate hope of recovery.
Levin knew too that Kitty had strengthened his hope by accounts of the
marvelous recoveries she had heard of. Levin knew all this; and it was
agonizingly painful to him to behold the supplicating, hopeful eyes and
the emaciated wrist, lifted with difficulty, making the sign of the
cross on the tense brow, and the prominent shoulders and hollow, gasping
chest, which one could not feel consistent with the life the sick man
was praying for. During the sacrament Levin did what he, an unbeliever,
had done a thousand times. He said, addressing God, "If Thou dost exist,
make this man to recover" (of course this same thing has been repeated
many times), "and Thou wilt save him and me."

After extreme unction the sick man became suddenly much better. He did
not cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kitty’s hand,
thanking her with tears, and said he was comfortable, free from pain,
and that he felt strong and had an appetite. He even raised himself when
his soup was brought, and asked for a cutlet as well. Hopelessly ill as
he was, obvious as it was at the first glance that he could not recover,
Levin and Kitty were for that hour both in the same state of excitement,
happy, though fearful of being mistaken.

This self-deception was not of long duration. The sick man fell into a
quiet sleep, but he was waked up half an hour later by his cough. And
all at once every hope vanished in those about him and in himself. The
reality of his suffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty and in the
sick man himself, leaving no doubt, no memory even of past hopes.

A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the end. But
the end did not come. The door opened and Kitty appeared. Levin got up
to stop her. But at the moment he was getting up, he caught the sound of
the dying man stirring.

With the dying man’s hand in his hand, he sat for half an hour, an hour,
another hour. He did not think of death at all now. He wondered what
Kitty was doing; who lived in the next room; whether the doctor lived in
a house of his own. He longed for food and for sleep. He cautiously drew
away his hand and felt the feet. The feet were cold, but the sick man
was still breathing. Levin tried again to move away on tiptoe, but the
sick man stirred again and said: "Don’t go."

The dawn came; the sick man’s condition was unchanged. Levin stealthily
withdrew his hand, and without looking at the dying man, went off to his
own room and went to sleep. When he woke up, instead of news of his
brother’s death which he expected, he learned that the sick man had
returned to his earlier condition. He had begun sitting up again,
coughing, had begun eating again, talking again, and again had ceased to
talk of death, again had begun to express hope of his recovery, and had
become more irritable and more gloomy than ever. No one, neither his
brother nor Kitty, could soothe him. He was angry with everyone, and
said nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone for his sufferings,
and insisted that they should get him a celebrated doctor from Moscow.
To all inquiries made him as to how he felt, he made the same answer
with an expression of vindictive reproachfulness, "I’m suffering
horribly, intolerably!"

The sick man was suffering more and more, especially from bedsores,
which it was impossible now to remedy, and grew more and more angry with
everyone about him, blaming them for everything, and especially for not
having brought him a doctor from Moscow. Kitty tried in every possible
way to relieve him, to soothe him; but it was all in vain, and Levin saw
that she herself was exhausted both physically and morally, though she
would not admit it. The sense of death, which had been evoked in all by
his taking leave of life on the night when he had sent for his brother,
was broken up. Everyone knew that he must inevitably die soon, that he
was half dead already. Everyone wished for nothing but that he should
die as soon as possible, and everyone, concealing this, gave him
medicines, tried to find remedies and doctors, and deceived him and
themselves and each other. All this was falsehood, disgusting,
irreverent deceit. And owing to the bent of his character, and because
he loved the dying man more than anyone else did, Levin was most
painfully conscious of this deceit.

Three more days of agony followed; the sick man was still in the same
condition. The sense of longing for his death was felt by everyone now
at the mere sight of him, by the waiters and the hotel-keeper and all
the people staying in the hotel, and the doctor and Marya Nikolaevna and
Levin and Kitty. The sick man alone did not express this feeling, but on
the contrary was furious at their not getting him doctors, and went on
taking medicine and talking of life. Only at rare moments, when the
opium gave him an instant’s relief from the never-ceasing pain, he would
sometimes, half asleep, utter what was ever more intense in his heart
than in all the others: "Oh, if it were only the end!" or: "When will it
be over?"

On the tenth day from their arrival at the town, Kitty was unwell. She
suffered from headache and sickness, and she could not get up all the
morning.

After dinner, however, Kitty got up and went as usual with her work to
the sick man. He looked at her sternly when she came in, and smiled
contemptuously when she said she had been unwell. That day he was
continually blowing his nose, and groaning piteously.

Marya Nikolaevna’s prediction came true. Towards night the sick man was
not able to lift his hands, and could only gaze before him with the same
intensely concentrated expression in his eyes. Even when his brother or
Kitty bent over him, so that he could see them, he looked just the same.
Kitty sent for the priest to read the prayer for the dying.

While the priest was reading it, the dying man did not show any sign of
life; his eyes were closed. Levin, Kitty, and Marya Nikolaevna stood at
the bedside. The priest had not quite finished reading the prayer when
the dying man stretched, sighed, and opened his eyes. The priest, on
finishing the prayer, put the cross to the cold forehead, then slowly
returned it to the stand, and after standing for two minutes more in
silence, he touched the huge, bloodless hand that was turning cold.

The doctor confirmed his suppositions in regard to Kitty. Her
indisposition was a symptom that she was with child.

Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at Pokrovskoe, at
her sister Kitty Levin’s. The house on her own estate was quite in
ruins, and Levin and his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer with
them. Stepan Arkadyevitch greatly approved of the arrangement. He said
he was very sorry his official duties prevented him from spending the
summer in the country with his family, which would have been the
greatest happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he came down to the
country from time to time for a day or two. Besides the Oblonskys, with
all their children and their governess, the old princess too came to
stay that summer with the Levins, as she considered it her duty to watch
over her inexperienced daughter in her _interesting condition_.
Moreover, Varenka, Kitty’s friend abroad, kept her promise to come to
Kitty when she was married, and stayed with her friend. All of these
were friends or relations of Levin’s wife. And though he liked them all,
he rather regretted his own Levin world and ways, which was smothered by
this influx of the "Shtcherbatsky element," as he called it to himself.
Of his own relations there stayed with him only Sergey Ivanovitch, but
he too was a man of the Koznishev and not the Levin stamp, so that the
Levin spirit was utterly obliterated.

In the Levins’ house, so long deserted, there were now so many people
that almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day it
happened that the old princess, sitting down to table, counted them all
over, and put the thirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a separate
table. And Kitty, with her careful housekeeping, had no little trouble
to get all the chickens, turkeys, and geese, of which so many were
needed to satisfy the summer appetites of the visitors and children.

"Oh, we shall be delighted," answered Varenka, coloring a little. Kitty
exchanged meaningful glances with Dolly. The proposal of the learned and
intellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with Varenka
confirmed certain theories of Kitty’s with which her mind had been very
busy of late. She made haste to address some remark to her mother, so
that her look should not be noticed. After dinner Sergey Ivanovitch sat
with his cup of coffee at the drawing-room window, and while he took
part in a conversation he had begun with his brother, he watched the
door through which the children would start on the mushroom-picking
expedition. Levin was sitting in the window near his brother.

Kitty stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the end of a
conversation that had no interest for her, in order to tell him
something.

"You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for the
better," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling to Kitty, and obviously little
interested in the conversation, "but you have remained true to your
passion for defending the most paradoxical theories."

"And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?" said Kitty to her husband, as soon as
Sergey Ivanovitch rose. She spoke so that Sergey Ivanovitch could hear,
and it was clear that she meant him to do so. "And how good-looking she
is—such a refined beauty! Varenka!" Kitty shouted. "Shall you be in the
mill copse? We’ll come out to you."

"You certainly forget your condition, Kitty," said the old princess,
hurriedly coming out at the door. "You mustn’t shout like that."

Varenka, hearing Kitty’s voice and her mother’s reprimand, went with
light, rapid steps up to Kitty. The rapidity of her movement, her
flushed and eager face, everything betrayed that something out of the
common was going on in her. Kitty knew what this was, and had been
watching her intently. She called Varenka at that moment merely in order
mentally to give her a blessing for the important event which, as Kitty
fancied, was bound to come to pass that day after dinner in the wood.

"Why, what do you want there?" said Kitty.

On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party. They always
liked sitting there after dinner, and that day they had work to do there
too. Besides the sewing and knitting of baby clothes, with which all of
them were busy, that afternoon jam was being made on the terrace by a
method new to Agafea Mihalovna, without the addition of water. Kitty had
introduced this new method, which had been in use in her home. Agafea
Mihalovna, to whom the task of jam-making had always been intrusted,
considering that what had been done in the Levin household could not be
amiss, had nevertheless put water with the strawberries, maintaining
that the jam could not be made without it. She had been caught in the
act, and was now making jam before everyone, and it was to be proved to
her conclusively that jam could be very well made without water.

"I always buy my maids’ dresses myself, of some cheap material," the
princess said, continuing the previous conversation. "Isn’t it time to
skim it, my dear?" she added, addressing Agafea Mihalovna. "There’s not
the slightest need for you to do it, and it’s hot for you," she said,
stopping Kitty.

"Money’s out of the question!" the princess and Kitty exclaimed with one
voice. "They appreciate a present..."

"Ah! how sweet it is! don’t frighten it!" Kitty said suddenly, looking
at a sparrow that had settled on the step and was pecking at the center
of a raspberry.

"_À propos de Varenka_," said Kitty, speaking in French, as they had
been doing all the while, so that Agafea Mihalovna should not understand
them, "you know, mamma, I somehow expect things to be settled today. You
know what I mean. How splendid it would be!"

"Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for her too, nothing
better could be imagined. In the first place, she’s charming!" said
Kitty, crooking one of her fingers.

"Mamma, how did papa make you an offer?" Kitty asked suddenly.

Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to her mother
on equal terms about those questions of such paramount interest in a
woman’s life.

And the three women all fell to musing on the same thing. Kitty was the
first to break the silence. She remembered all that last winter before
her marriage, and her passion for Vronsky.

"Yes," Kitty answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.

"Oh, yes, but we didn’t mean that," Kitty said, flushing a little.

"Oh, mamma!" said Kitty, with an expression of suffering.

"How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then," said Dolly, "and how
unhappy for her. It turned out quite the opposite," she said, struck by
her own ideas. "Then Anna was so happy, and Kitty thought herself
unhappy. Now it is just the opposite. I often think of her."

"A nice person to think about! Horrid, repulsive woman—no heart," said
her mother, who could not forget that Kitty had married not Vronsky, but
Levin.

"What do you want to talk of it for?" Kitty said with annoyance. "I
never think about it, and I don’t want to think of it.... And I don’t
want to think of it," she said, catching the sound of her husband’s
well-known step on the steps of the terrace.

For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of Agafea
Mihalovna, vexation at their making jam without water, and altogether at
the outside Shtcherbatsky element. He smiled, however, and went up to
Kitty.

"Oh, very well," said Kitty, smiling, "and how have things gone with
you?"

"What! you want to take Kitty in the wagonette?" her mother said
reproachfully.

"Come with us, maman," said Kitty.

"Well, I’ll walk then, I’m so well." Kitty got up and went to her
husband and took his hand.

"It’ll be all the better, Agafea Mihalovna, it won’t mildew, even though
our ice has begun to thaw already, so that we’ve no cool cellar to store
it," said Kitty, at once divining her husband’s motive, and addressing
the old housekeeper with the same feeling; "but your pickle’s so good,
that mamma says she never tasted any like it," she added, smiling, and
putting her kerchief straight.

Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kitty.

"You needn’t try to console me, mistress. I need only to look at you
with him, and I feel happy," she said, and something in the rough
familiarity of that _with him_ touched Kitty.

Kitty was particularly glad of a chance of being alone with her husband,
for she had noticed the shade of mortification that had passed over his
face—always so quick to reflect every feeling—at the moment when he had
come onto the terrace and asked what they were talking of, and had got
no answer.

"You think he can’t fall in love," said Kitty, translating into her own
language.

"And you?" Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving smile.

She could never have explained the chain of thought that made her smile;
but the last link in it was that her husband, in exalting his brother
and abasing himself, was not quite sincere. Kitty knew that this
insincerity came from his love for his brother, from his sense of shame
at being too happy, and above all from his unflagging craving to be
better—she loved it in him, and so she smiled.

"But in what way?" Kitty pursued with the same smile. "Don’t you too
work for others? What about your co-operative settlement, and your work
on the estate, and your book?..."

"Well, what would you say about papa?" asked Kitty. "Is he a poor
creature then, as he does nothing for the public good?"

"Well, but would you like to change this minute with Sergey Ivanovitch?"
said Kitty. "Would you like to do this work for the general good, and to
love the task set you, as he does, and nothing else?"

"No, no!" Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him. She had been
watching his fingers with interest. "You picked off two."

"Aren’t you tired, Kitty?" called the princess.

However many women and girls he thought of whom he knew, he could not
think of a girl who united to such a degree all, positively all, the
qualities he would wish to see in his wife. She had all the charm and
freshness of youth, but she was not a child; and if she loved him, she
loved him consciously as a woman ought to love; that was one thing.
Another point: she was not only far from being worldly, but had an
unmistakable distaste for worldly society, and at the same time she knew
the world, and had all the ways of a woman of the best society, which
were absolutely essential to Sergey Ivanovitch’s conception of the woman
who was to share his life. Thirdly: she was religious, and not like a
child, unconsciously religious and good, as Kitty, for example, was, but
her life was founded on religious principles. Even in trifling matters,
Sergey Ivanovitch found in her all that he wanted in his wife: she was
poor and alone in the world, so she would not bring with her a mass of
relations and their influence into her husband’s house, as he saw now in
Kitty’s case. She would owe everything to her husband, which was what he
had always desired too for his future family life. And this girl, who
united all these qualities, loved him. He was a modest man, but he could
not help seeing it. And he loved her. There was one consideration
against it—his age. But he came of a long-lived family, he had not a
single gray hair, no one would have taken him for forty, and he
remembered Varenka’s saying that it was only in Russia that men of fifty
thought themselves old, and that in France a man of fifty considers
himself _dans la force de l’âge_, while a man of forty is _un jeune
homme_. But what did the mere reckoning of years matter when he felt as
young in heart as he had been twenty years ago? Was it not youth to feel
as he felt now, when coming from the other side to the edge of the wood
he saw in the glowing light of the slanting sunbeams the gracious figure
of Varenka in her yellow gown with her basket, walking lightly by the
trunk of an old birch tree, and when this impression of the sight of
Varenka blended so harmoniously with the beauty of the view, of the
yellow oatfield lying bathed in the slanting sunshine, and beyond it the
distant ancient forest flecked with yellow and melting into the blue of
the distance? His heart throbbed joyously. A softened feeling came over
him. He felt that he had made up his mind. Varenka, who had just
crouched down to pick a mushroom, rose with a supple movement and looked
round. Flinging away the cigar, Sergey Ivanovitch advanced with resolute
steps towards her.

Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka walked out of the
wood. Kitty had no need to ask Varenka; she saw from the calm and
somewhat crestfallen faces of both that her plans had not come off.

"It doesn’t bite," said Kitty, her smile and manner of speaking
recalling her father, a likeness Levin often noticed with pleasure.

During the time of the children’s tea the grown-up people sat in the
balcony and talked as though nothing had happened, though they all,
especially Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very well aware that
there had happened an event which, though negative, was of very great
importance. They both had the same feeling, rather like that of a
schoolboy after an examination, which has left him in the same class or
shut him out of the school forever. Everyone present, feeling too that
something had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects. Levin
and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of their love that
evening. And their happiness in their love seemed to imply a
disagreeable slur on those who would have liked to feel the same and
could not—and they felt a prick of conscience.

"But papa has left us alone. We’ve never seen him," said Kitty.
"Besides, we’re not young people!—we’re old, married people by now."

"What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?" Kitty asked suddenly of Agafea
Mihalovna, who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face full of
meaning.

Varenka was saying the same thing to Kitty. Even in the happy,
well-ordered household of the Levins Varenka had succeeded in making
herself useful.

"Yes, he’s very heedless," said the princess, addressing Sergey
Ivanovitch. "I’ve been meaning, indeed, to ask you to tell him that it’s
out of the question for her" (she indicated Kitty) "to stay here; that
she positively must come to Moscow. He talks of getting a doctor
down..."

"Maman, he’ll do everything; he has agreed to everything," Kitty said,
angry with her mother for appealing to Sergey Ivanovitch to judge in
such a matter.

"And some one else too! Papa, of course!" cried Levin, stopping at the
entrance of the avenue. "Kitty, don’t come down the steep staircase, go
round."

Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind. He was rather
vexed at the non-arrival of the old prince, whom he liked more and more
the more he saw of him, and also at the arrival of this Vassenka
Veslovsky, a quite uncongenial and superfluous person. He seemed to him
still more uncongenial and superfluous when, on approaching the steps
where the whole party, children and grown-up, were gathered together in
much excitement, Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly warm
and gallant air, kissing Kitty’s hand.

And more hateful than anyone was Kitty for falling in with the tone of
gaiety with which this gentleman regarded his visit in the country, as
though it were a holiday for himself and everyone else. And, above all,
unpleasant was that particular smile with which she responded to his
smile.

Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband. She tried to seize a
moment to speak to him alone, but he made haste to get away from her,
saying he was wanted at the counting-house. It was long since his own
work on the estate had seemed to him so important as at that moment.
"It’s all holiday for them," he thought; "but these are no holiday
matters, they won’t wait, and there’s no living without them."

Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon him to
supper. On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna,
consulting about wines for supper.

"No, Stiva doesn’t drink ... Kostya, stop, what’s the matter?" Kitty
began, hurrying after him, but he strode ruthlessly away to the dining
room without waiting for her, and at once joined in the lively general
conversation which was being maintained there by Vassenka Veslovsky and
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any shooting yet
this year?" said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his leg, but
speaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so well in him, and
that was so out of keeping with him. "I can’t answer for our finding
grouse, but there are plenty of snipe. Only we ought to start early.
You’re not tired? Aren’t you tired, Stiva?"

Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kitty.

Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never pausing
in his conversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw that there was
an eager and mysterious conversation going on between Stepan
Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky. And that was not all. He saw
on his wife’s face an expression of real feeling as she gazed with fixed
eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who was telling them something
with great animation.

"To be sure," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "And you, Kitty?"

"I? Why should I go?" Kitty said, flushing all over, and she glanced
round at her husband.

"No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won’t see anything of
her husband, and set off the day after," said Kitty.

The motive of Kitty’s words was interpreted by Levin thus: "Don’t
separate me from _him_. I don’t care about _your_ going, but do let me
enjoy the society of this delightful young man."

Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery his presence had
occasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching her with
smiling and admiring eyes, he followed her.

Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by getting up
herself and advising Kitty to go to bed. But even at this point Levin
could not escape another agony. As he said good-night to his hostess,
Vassenka would again have kissed her hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew
back her hand and said with a naïve bluntness, for which the old
princess scolded her afterwards:

"Why, how can one want to go to bed!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who,
after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in his most
charming and sentimental humor. "Look, Kitty," he said, pointing to the
moon, which had just risen behind the lime trees—"how exquisite!
Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade. You know, he has a splendid
voice; we practiced songs together along the road. He has brought some
lovely songs with him, two new ones. Varvara Andreevna and he must sing
some duets."

"Eyes like what?" said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as possible to
recall every word and gesture of that evening and every shade implied in
them.

"But, Kostya, you’re exaggerating," said Kitty, at the bottom of her
heart rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now in his
jealousy.

"Do you know, I understand now what it’s all come from," Kitty was
beginning.

Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple of days
from her husband, but when she saw his eager figure, looking big and
strong in his shooting-boots and his white blouse, and a sort of
sportsman elation and excitement incomprehensible to her, she forgot her
own chagrin for the sake of his pleasure, and said good-bye to him
cheerfully.

But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty’s words at
parting: "Mind you don’t shoot one another." The dogs came nearer and
nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own scent. The expectation
of snipe was so intense that to Levin the squelching sound of his own
heel, as he drew it up out of the mire, seemed to be the call of a
snipe, and he clutched and pressed the lock of his gun.

"Tomorrow I’ll go out early, and I’ll make a point of keeping cool.
There are lots of snipe; and there are grouse too. When I come back
there’ll be the note from Kitty. Yes, Stiva may be right, I’m not manly
with her, I’m tied to her apron-strings.... Well, it can’t be helped!
Negative again...."

The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s envy pleased Levin.
He was pleased too on returning to find the man sent by Kitty with a
note was already there.

The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute destroyed his
good humor, though later he laughed at it a great deal, was to find that
of all the provisions Kitty had provided in such abundance that one
would have thought there was enough for a week, nothing was left. On his
way back, tired and hungry from shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision
of meat-pies that as he approached the hut he seemed to smell and taste
them, as Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told Philip to
give him some. It appeared that there were no pies left, nor even any
chicken.

"We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!" said
Veslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was sitting at the samovar. "What a
pity ladies are cut off from these delights!"

"Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house," Levin
said to himself. Again he fancied something in the smile, in the
all-conquering air with which their guest addressed Kitty....

The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with Marya
Vlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and began
to talk to him about moving to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement, and
getting ready rooms for them. Just as Levin had disliked all the trivial
preparations for his wedding, as derogatory to the grandeur of the
event, now he felt still more offensive the preparations for the
approaching birth, the date of which they reckoned, it seemed, on their
fingers. He tried to turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best
patterns of long clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and
avoid seeing the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the triangles
of linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance. The
birth of a son (he was certain it would be a son) which was promised
him, but which he still could not believe in—so marvelous it
seemed—presented itself to his mind, on one hand, as a happiness so
immense, and therefore so incredible; on the other, as an event so
mysterious, that this assumption of a definite knowledge of what would
be, and consequent preparation for it, as for something ordinary that
did happen to people, jarred on him as confusing and humiliating.

"Oh, no, as Kitty wishes."

"We can’t talk to Kitty about it! Do you want me to frighten her? Why,
this spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an ignorant doctor."

"No, it’s impossible," he thought, glancing now and then at Vassenka
bending over Kitty, telling her something with his charming smile, and
at her, flushed and disturbed.

There was something not nice in Vassenka’s attitude, in his eyes, in his
smile. Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty’s attitude and look.
And again the light died away in his eyes. Again, as before, all of a
sudden, without the slightest transition, he felt cast down from a
pinnacle of happiness, peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair,
rage, and humiliation. Again everything and everyone had become hateful
to him.

The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on the same
lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and whether love is
to be put higher than worldly considerations. Kitty disliked the
conversation, and she was disturbed both by the subject and the tone in
which it was conducted, and also by the knowledge of the effect it would
have on her husband. But she was too simple and innocent to know how to
cut short this conversation, or even to conceal the superficial pleasure
afforded her by the young man’s very obvious admiration. She wanted to
stop it, but she did not know what to do. Whatever she did she knew
would be observed by her husband, and the worst interpretation put on
it. And, in fact, when she asked Dolly what was wrong with Masha, and
Vassenka, waiting till this uninteresting conversation was over, began
to gaze indifferently at Dolly, the question struck Levin as an
unnatural and disgusting piece of hypocrisy.

"By all means, please, and I shall come too," said Kitty, and she
blushed. She wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether he would
come, and she did not ask him. "Where are you going, Kostya?" she asked
her husband with a guilty face, as he passed by her with a resolute
step. This guilty air confirmed all his suspicions.

They were standing in the passage. Kitty would have gone into the next
room, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a lesson.

"I’ve not been in there, I’ve been alone in the garden with Kitty. We’ve
had a quarrel for the second time since ... Stiva came."

"Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been ... not in Kitty, but in
that gentleman’s behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant—not
unpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a husband?"

"Not only I, but Stiva noticed it. Just after breakfast he said to me in
so many words, _Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin de cour à
Kitty_."

"I wanted...." He paused, but suddenly, remembering Kitty and everything
that had happened, he said, looking him resolutely in the face: "I have
ordered the horses to be put-to for you."

After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant’s with whom Levin had
stayed on the way to Sviazhsky’s, and chatting with the women about
their children, and with the old man about Count Vronsky, whom the
latter praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna, at ten o’clock, went on
again. At home, looking after her children, she had no time to think. So
now, after this journey of four hours, all the thoughts she had
suppressed before rushed swarming into her brain, and she thought over
all her life as she never had before, and from the most different points
of view. Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself. At first she
thought about the children, about whom she was uneasy, although the
princess and Kitty (she reckoned more upon her) had promised to look
after them. "If only Masha does not begin her naughty tricks, if Grisha
isn’t kicked by a horse, and Lily’s stomach isn’t upset again!" she
thought. But these questions of the present were succeeded by questions
of the immediate future. She began thinking how she had to get a new
flat in Moscow for the coming winter, to renew the drawing room
furniture, and to make her elder girl a cloak. Then questions of the
more remote future occurred to her: how she was to place her children in
the world. "The girls are all right," she thought; "but the boys?"

"Yes, altogether," thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back over her
whole existence during those fifteen years of her married life,
"pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indifference to everything, and
most of all—hideousness. Kitty, young and pretty as she is, even Kitty
has lost her looks; and I when I’m with child become hideous, I know it.
The birth, the agony, the hideous agonies, that last moment ... then the
nursing, the sleepless nights, the fearful pains...."

"And all this, what’s it for? What is to come of it all? That I’m
wasting my life, never having a moment’s peace, either with child, or
nursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched myself and
worrying others, repulsive to my husband, while the children are growing
up unhappy, badly educated, and penniless. Even now, if it weren’t for
spending the summer at the Levins’, I don’t know how we should be
managing to live. Of course Kostya and Kitty have so much tact that we
don’t feel it; but it can’t go on. They’ll have children, they won’t be
able to keep us; it’s a drag on them as it is. How is papa, who has
hardly anything left for himself, to help us? So that I can’t even bring
the children up by myself, and may find it hard with the help of other
people, at the cost of humiliation. Why, even if we suppose the greatest
good luck, that the children don’t die, and I bring them up somehow. At
the very best they’ll simply be decent people. That’s all I can hope
for. And to gain simply that—what agonies, what toil!... One’s whole
life ruined!" Again she recalled what the young peasant woman had said,
and again she was revolted at the thought; but she could not help
admitting that there was a grain of brutal truth in the words.

The most diverse suppositions as to what he was about to speak of to her
flashed into her brain. "He is going to beg me to come to stay with them
with the children, and I shall have to refuse; or to create a set that
will receive Anna in Moscow.... Or isn’t it Vassenka Veslovsky and his
relations with Anna? Or perhaps about Kitty, that he feels he was to
blame?" All her conjectures were unpleasant, but she did not guess what
he really wanted to talk about to her.

"Well, what of Kitty?" she said with a heavy sigh, looking penitently at
Dolly. "Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn’t she angry with me?"

"Yes, yes, but we’ve not finished about Kitty. Is she happy? He’s a very
nice man, they say."

In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement. He had spent
a whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey Ivanovitch, who
had property in the Kashinsky province, and took great interest in the
question of the approaching elections, made ready to set off to the
elections. He invited his brother, who had a vote in the Seleznevsky
district, to come with him. Levin had, moreover, to transact in Kashin
some extremely important business relating to the wardship of land and
to the receiving of certain redemption money for his sister, who was
abroad.

Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was bored in Moscow,
and urged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the proper
nobleman’s uniform, costing seven pounds. And that seven pounds paid for
the uniform was the chief cause that finally decided Levin to go. He
went to Kashin....

Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he was bored in the
country and wanted to show Anna his right to independence, and also to
repay Sviazhsky by his support at the election for all the trouble he
had taken for Vronsky at the district council election, but chiefly in
order strictly to perform all those duties of a nobleman and landowner
which he had taken upon himself. But he had not in the least expected
that the election would so interest him, so keenly excite him, and that
he would be so good at this kind of thing. He was quite a new man in the
circle of the nobility of the province, but his success was
unmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that he had already
obtained a certain influence. This influence was due to his wealth and
reputation, the capital house in the town lent him by his old friend
Shirkov, who had a post in the department of finances and was director
of a flourishing bank in Kashin; the excellent cook Vronsky had brought
from the country, and his friendship with the governor, who was a
schoolfellow of Vronsky’s—a schoolfellow he had patronized and protected
indeed. But what contributed more than all to his success was his
direct, equable manner with everyone, which very quickly made the
majority of the noblemen reverse the current opinion of his supposed
haughtiness. He was himself conscious that, except that whimsical
gentleman married to Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, who had _à propos de bottes_
poured out a stream of irrelevant absurdities with such spiteful fury,
every nobleman with whom he had made acquaintance had become his
adherent. He saw clearly, and other people recognized it, too, that he
had done a great deal to secure the success of Nevyedovsky. And now at
his own table, celebrating Nevyedovsky’s election, he was experiencing
an agreeable sense of triumph over the success of his candidate. The
election itself had so fascinated him that, if he could succeed in
getting married during the next three years, he began to think of
standing himself—much as after winning a race ridden by a jockey, he had
longed to ride a race himself.

The Levins had been three months in Moscow. The date had long passed on
which, according to the most trustworthy calculations of people learned
in such matters, Kitty should have been confined. But she was still
about, and there was nothing to show that her time was any nearer than
two months ago. The doctor, the monthly nurse, and Dolly and her mother,
and most of all Levin, who could not think of the approaching event
without terror, began to be impatient and uneasy. Kitty was the only
person who felt perfectly calm and happy.

She liked his serene, friendly, and hospitable manner in the country. In
the town he seemed continually uneasy and on his guard, as though he
were afraid someone would be rude to him, and still more to her. At home
in the country, knowing himself distinctly to be in his right place, he
was never in haste to be off elsewhere. He was never unoccupied. Here in
town he was in a continual hurry, as though afraid of missing something,
and yet he had nothing to do. And she felt sorry for him. To others, she
knew, he did not appear an object of pity. On the contrary, when Kitty
looked at him in society, as one sometimes looks at those one loves,
trying to see him as if he were a stranger, so as to catch the
impression he must make on others, she saw with a panic even of jealous
fear that he was far indeed from being a pitiable figure, that he was
very attractive with his fine breeding, his rather old-fashioned,
reserved courtesy with women, his powerful figure, and striking, as she
thought, and expressive face. But she saw him not from without, but from
within; she saw that here he was not himself; that was the only way she
could define his condition to herself. Sometimes she inwardly reproached
him for his inability to live in the town; sometimes she recognized that
it was really hard for him to order his life here so that he could be
satisfied with it.

One event, an event of great importance to both from that point of view,
did indeed happen—that was Kitty’s meeting with Vronsky.

The old Princess Marya Borissovna, Kitty’s godmother, who had always
been very fond of her, had insisted on seeing her. Kitty, though she did
not go into society at all on account of her condition, went with her
father to see the venerable old lady, and there met Vronsky.

The only thing Kitty could reproach herself for at this meeting was that
at the instant when she recognized in his civilian dress the features
once so familiar to her, her breath failed her, the blood rushed to her
heart, and a vivid blush—she felt it—overspread her face. But this
lasted only a few seconds. Before her father, who purposely began
talking in a loud voice to Vronsky, had finished, she was perfectly
ready to look at Vronsky, to speak to him, if necessary, exactly as she
spoke to Princess Marya Borissovna, and more than that, to do so in such
a way that everything to the faintest intonation and smile would have
been approved by her husband, whose unseen presence she seemed to feel
about her at that instant.

"Go, please, go then and call on the Bols," Kitty said to her husband,
when he came in to see her at eleven o’clock before going out. "I know
you are dining at the club; papa put down your name. But what are you
going to do in the morning?"

"Yes; wasn’t it his article you were praising so? Well, and after that?"
said Kitty.

Kitty laughed.

"No, they won’t. I’ll answer for that," said Kitty, looking into his
face with a laugh. She took his hand. "Well, good-bye.... Do go,
please."

Only during the first days of his stay in Moscow Levin had been struck
by the expenditure, strange to one living in the country, unproductive
but inevitable, that was expected of him on every side. But by now he
had grown used to it. That had happened to him in this matter which is
said to happen to drunkards—the first glass sticks in the throat, the
second flies down like a hawk, but after the third they’re like tiny
little birds. When Levin had changed his first hundred-rouble note to
pay for liveries for his footmen and hall-porter he could not help
reflecting that these liveries were of no use to anyone—but they were
indubitably necessary, to judge by the amazement of the princess and
Kitty when he suggested that they might do without liveries,—that these
liveries would cost the wages of two laborers for the summer, that is,
would pay for about three hundred working days from Easter to Ash
Wednesday, and each a day of hard work from early morning to late
evening—and that hundred-rouble note did stick in his throat. But the
next note, changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations,
that cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin the
reflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine measures of oats, which
men would with groans and sweat have reaped and bound and thrashed and
winnowed and sifted and sown,—this next one he parted with more easily.
And now the notes he changed no longer aroused such reflections, and
they flew off like little birds. Whether the labor devoted to obtaining
the money corresponded to the pleasure given by what was bought with it,
was a consideration he had long ago dismissed. His business calculation
that there was a certain price below which he could not sell certain
grain was forgotten too. The rye, for the price of which he had so long
held out, had been sold for fifty kopecks a measure cheaper than it had
been fetching a month ago. Even the consideration that with such an
expenditure he could not go on living for a year without debt, that even
had no force. Only one thing was essential: to have money in the bank,
without inquiring where it came from, so as to know that one had the
wherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow. And this condition had hitherto
been fulfilled; he had always had the money in the bank. But now the
money in the bank had gone, and he could not quite tell where to get the
next installment. And this it was which, at the moment when Kitty had
mentioned money, had disturbed him; but he had no time to think about
it. He drove off, thinking of Katavasov and the meeting with Metrov that
was before him.

Lvov, the husband of Natalia, Kitty’s sister, had spent all his life in
foreign capitals, where he had been educated, and had been in the
diplomatic service.

"Capital! I was meaning to send to you. How’s Kitty? Sit here, it’s more
comfortable." He got up and pushed up a rocking chair. "Have you read
the last circular in the _Journal de St. Petersbourg?_ I think it’s
excellent," he said, with a slight French accent.

"I didn’t know you were here," she said, unmistakably feeling no regret,
but a positive pleasure, in interrupting this conversation on a topic
she had heard so much of that she was by now weary of it. "Well, how is
Kitty? I am dining with you today. I tell you what, Arseny," she turned
to her husband, "you take the carriage."

And the husband and wife began to discuss their arrangements for the
day. As the husband had to drive to meet someone on official business,
while the wife had to go to the concert and some public meeting of a
committee on the Eastern Question, there was a great deal to consider
and settle. Levin had to take part in their plans as one of themselves.
It was settled that Levin should go with Natalia to the concert and the
meeting, and that from there they should send the carriage to the office
for Arseny, and he should call for her and take her to Kitty’s; or that,
if he had not finished his work, he should send the carriage back and
Levin would go with her.

"Oh, Kitty told me to talk to you about Oblonsky," he said, as Lvov was
standing on the stairs, seeing his wife and Levin off.

After driving home with his sister-in-law, and finding Kitty in good
spirits and quite well, Levin drove to the club.

"Ah! why are you late?" the prince said smiling, and giving him his hand
over his own shoulder. "How’s Kitty?" he added, smoothing out the napkin
he had tucked in at his waistcoat buttons.

"Oblonsky’s carriage!" the porter shouted in an angry bass. The carriage
drove up and both got in. It was only for the first few moments, while
the carriage was driving out of the clubhouse gates, that Levin was
still under the influence of the club atmosphere of repose, comfort, and
unimpeachable good form. But as soon as the carriage drove out into the
street, and he felt it jolting over the uneven road, heard the angry
shout of a sledge driver coming towards them, saw in the uncertain light
the red blind of a tavern and the shops, this impression was dissipated,
and he began to think over his actions, and to wonder whether he was
doing right in going to see Anna. What would Kitty say? But Stepan
Arkadyevitch gave him no time for reflection, and, as though divining
his doubts, he scattered them.

But Kitty took not the slightest interest in discussing the drinking
habits of the peasants. She saw that he blushed, and she wanted to know
why.

Kitty’s eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna’s name, but
controlling herself with an effort, she concealed her emotion and
deceived him.

"Yes, of course, she is very much to be pitied," said Kitty, when he had
finished. "Whom was your letter from?"

Coming back, he found Kitty in the same easy chair. When he went up to
her, she glanced at him and broke into sobs.

After taking leave of her guests, Anna did not sit down, but began
walking up and down the room. She had unconsciously the whole evening
done her utmost to arouse in Levin a feeling of love—as of late she had
fallen into doing with all young men—and she knew she had attained her
aim, as far as was possible in one evening, with a married and
conscientious man. She liked him indeed extremely, and, in spite of the
striking difference, from the masculine point of view, between Vronsky
and Levin, as a woman she saw something they had in common, which had
made Kitty able to love both. Yet as soon as he was out of the room, she
ceased to think of him.

At five o’clock the creak of a door opening waked him. He jumped up and
looked round. Kitty was not in bed beside him. But there was a light
moving behind the screen, and he heard her steps.

"What is it?... what is it?" he said, half-asleep. "Kitty! What is it?"

Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in Kitty’s
character in general, Levin was struck by what was revealed now, when
suddenly all disguises were thrown off and the very kernel of her soul
shone in her eyes. And in this simplicity and nakedness of her soul,
she, the very woman he loved in her, was more manifest than ever. She
looked at him, smiling; but all at once her brows twitched, she threw up
her head, and going quickly up to him, clutched his hand and pressed
close up to him, breathing her hot breath upon him. She was in pain and
was, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering. And for the first
minute, from habit, it seemed to him that he was to blame. But in her
eyes there was a tenderness that told him that she was far from
reproaching him, that she loved him for her sufferings. "If not I, who
is to blame for it?" he thought unconsciously, seeking someone
responsible for this suffering for him to punish; but there was no one
responsible. She was suffering, complaining, and triumphing in her
sufferings, and rejoicing in them, and loving them. He saw that
something sublime was being accomplished in her soul, but what? He could
not make it out. It was beyond his understanding.

As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the maid-servant come in at
the other. He stood at the door and heard Kitty giving exact directions
to the maid, and beginning to help her move the bedstead.

Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving directions.

All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form no
conception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin. He lost all sense
of time. Minutes—those minutes when she sent for him and he held her
moist hand, that would squeeze his hand with extraordinary violence and
then push it away—seemed to him hours, and hours seemed to him minutes.
He was surprised when Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a candle
behind a screen, and he found that it was five o’clock in the afternoon.
If he had been told it was only ten o’clock in the morning, he would not
have been more surprised. Where he was all this time, he knew as little
as the time of anything. He saw her swollen face, sometimes bewildered
and in agony, sometimes smiling and trying to reassure him. He saw the
old princess too, flushed and overwrought, with her gray curls in
disorder, forcing herself to gulp down her tears, biting her lips; he
saw Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fat cigarettes, and Lizaveta
Petrovna with a firm, resolute, reassuring face, and the old prince
walking up and down the hall with a frowning face. But why they came in
and went out, where they were, he did not know. The princess was with
the doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a table set for
dinner suddenly appeared; then she was not there, but Dolly was. Then
Levin remembered he had been sent somewhere. Once he had been sent to
move a table and sofa. He had done this eagerly, thinking it had to be
done for her sake, and only later on he found it was his own bed he had
been getting ready. Then he had been sent to the study to ask the doctor
something. The doctor had answered and then had said something about the
irregularities in the municipal council. Then he had been sent to the
bedroom to help the old princess to move the holy picture in its silver
and gold setting, and with the princess’s old waiting maid he had
clambered on a shelf to reach it and had broken the little lamp, and the
old servant had tried to reassure him about the lamp and about his wife,
and he carried the holy picture and set it at Kitty’s head, carefully
tucking it in behind the pillow. But where, when, and why all this had
happened, he could not tell. He did not understand why the old princess
took his hand, and looking compassionately at him, begged him not to
worry himself, and Dolly persuaded him to eat something and led him out
of the room, and even the doctor looked seriously and with commiseration
at him and offered him a drop of something.

He did not know whether it was late or early. The candles had all burned
out. Dolly had just been in the study and had suggested to the doctor
that he should lie down. Levin sat listening to the doctor’s stories of
a quack mesmerizer and looking at the ashes of his cigarette. There had
been a period of repose, and he had sunk into oblivion. He had
completely forgotten what was going on now. He heard the doctor’s chat
and understood it. Suddenly there came an unearthly shriek. The shriek
was so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but holding his breath,
gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor. The doctor put his head on one
side, listened, and smiled approvingly. Everything was so extraordinary
that nothing could strike Levin as strange. "I suppose it must be so,"
he thought, and still sat where he was. Whose scream was this? He jumped
up, ran on tiptoe to the bedroom, edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and the
princess, and took up his position at Kitty’s pillow. The scream had
subsided, but there was some change now. What it was he did not see and
did not comprehend, and he had no wish to see or comprehend. But he saw
it by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna. Lizaveta Petrovna’s face was stern
and pale, and still as resolute, though her jaws were twitching, and her
eyes were fixed intently on Kitty. Kitty’s swollen and agonized face, a
tress of hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and sought
his eyes. Her lifted hands asked for his hands. Clutching his chill
hands in her moist ones, she began squeezing them to her face.

But they might say what they liked, he knew now that all was over. He
stood in the next room, his head leaning against the door post, and
heard shrieks, howls such as he had never heard before, and he knew that
what had been Kitty was uttering these shrieks. He had long ago ceased
to wish for the child. By now he loathed this child. He did not even
wish for her life now, all he longed for was the end of this awful
anguish.

Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom. The first thing he saw was the
face of Lizaveta Petrovna. It was even more frowning and stern. Kitty’s
face he did not know. In the place where it had been was something that
was fearful in its strained distortion and in the sounds that came from
it. He fell down with his head on the wooden framework of the bed,
feeling that his heart was bursting. The awful scream never paused, it
became still more awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limit
of terror, suddenly it ceased. Levin could not believe his ears, but
there could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and he heard a subdued
stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice, gasping, alive,
tender, and blissful, uttered softly, "It’s over!"

"Mamma, is it true?" said Kitty’s voice.

If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that he had died
with her, and that their children were angels, and that God was standing
before him, he would have been surprised at nothing. But now, coming
back to the world of reality, he had to make great mental efforts to
take in that she was alive and well, and that the creature squalling so
desperately was his son. Kitty was alive, her agony was over. And he was
unutterably happy. That he understood; he was completely happy in it.
But the baby? Whence, why, who was he?... He could not get used to the
idea. It seemed to him something extraneous, superfluous, to which he
could not accustom himself.

At ten o’clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch were sitting at Levin’s. Having inquired after Kitty, they
had dropped into conversation upon other subjects. Levin heard them, and
unconsciously, as they talked, going over the past, over what had been
up to that morning, he thought of himself as he had been yesterday till
that point. It was as though a hundred years had passed since then. He
felt himself exalted to unattainable heights, from which he studiously
lowered himself so as not to wound the people he was talking to. He
talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her condition now,
of his son, in whose existence he tried to school himself into
believing. The whole world of woman, which had taken for him since his
marriage a new value he had never suspected before, was now so exalted
that he could not take it in in his imagination. He heard them talk of
yesterday’s dinner at the club, and thought: "What is happening with her
now? Is she asleep? How is she? What is she thinking of? Is he crying,
my son Dmitri?" And in the middle of the conversation, in the middle of
a sentence, he jumped up and went out of the room.

Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never taking her eyes off
the baby. "Give him to me! give him to me!" she said, and even made as
though she would sit up.

"Come, that’s enough, that’s enough!" said Lizaveta Petrovna, but Kitty
would not let the baby go. He fell asleep in her arms.

"Look, now," said Kitty, turning the baby so that he could see it. The
aged-looking little face suddenly puckered up still more and the baby
sneezed.

"Kitty! Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!" thought Anna, "the girl
he thinks of with love. He’s sorry he didn’t marry her. But me he thinks
of with hatred, and is sorry he had anything to do with me."

"We had a telegram too," answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.

"Yes; Kitty," said Dolly, embarrassed. "She stayed in the nursery. She
has been very ill."

"What’s this? Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?" thought Anna
when she was alone. "Perhaps she’s right, too. But it’s not for her, the
girl who was in love with Vronsky, it’s not for her to show me that,
even if it is true. I know that in my position I can’t be received by
any decent woman. I knew that from the first moment I sacrificed
everything to him. And this is my reward! Oh, how I hate him! And what
did I come here for? I’m worse here, more miserable." She heard from the
next room the sisters’ voices in consultation. "And what am I going to
say to Dolly now? Amuse Kitty by the sight of my wretchedness, submit to
her patronizing? No; and besides, Dolly wouldn’t understand. And it
would be no good my telling her. It would only be interesting to see
Kitty, to show her how I despise everyone and everything, how nothing
matters to me now."

"Why does Kitty shrink from me?" she said, looking at the door and
flushing red.

Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but Dolly
persuaded her. Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked up to her,
blushing, and shook hands.

Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict between her
antagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be nice to her. But as
soon as she saw Anna’s lovely and attractive face, all feeling of
antagonism disappeared.

Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes. She ascribed
this hostility to the awkward position in which Anna, who had once
patronized her, must feel with her now, and she felt sorry for her.

They talked of Kitty’s illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was
obvious that nothing interested Anna.

But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.

"He has gone back to the country," said Kitty, blushing.

"I’ll be sure to!" Kitty said naïvely, looking compassionately into her
eyes.

"So good-bye, Dolly." And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with Kitty,
Anna went out hurriedly.

"She’s just the same and just as charming! She’s very lovely!" said
Kitty, when she was alone with her sister. "But there’s something
piteous about her. Awfully piteous!"

Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind than
when she set out from home. To her previous tortures was added now that
sense of mortification and of being an outcast which she had felt so
distinctly on meeting Kitty.

"How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible, and
curious! What can he be telling the other with such warmth?" she
thought, staring at two men who walked by. "Can one ever tell anyone
what one is feeling? I meant to tell Dolly, and it’s a good thing I
didn’t tell her. How pleased she would have been at my misery! She would
have concealed it, but her chief feeling would have been delight at my
being punished for the happiness she envied me for. Kitty, she would
have been even more pleased. How I can see through her! She knows I was
more than usually sweet to her husband. And she’s jealous and hates me.
And she despises me. In her eyes I’m an immoral woman. If I were an
immoral woman I could have made her husband fall in love with me ... if
I’d cared to. And, indeed, I did care to. There’s someone who’s pleased
with himself," she thought, as she saw a fat, rubicund gentleman coming
towards her. He took her for an acquaintance, and lifted his glossy hat
above his bald, glossy head, and then perceived his mistake. "He thought
he knew me. Well, he knows me as well as anyone in the world knows me. I
don’t know myself. I know my appetites, as the French say. They want
that dirty ice cream, that they do know for certain," she thought,
looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who took a barrel off
his head and began wiping his perspiring face with a towel. "We all want
what is sweet and nice. If not sweetmeats, then a dirty ice. And Kitty’s
the same—if not Vronsky, then Levin. And she envies me, and hates me.
And we all hate each other. I Kitty, Kitty me. Yes, that’s the truth.
‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur._’ _Je me fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._ I’ll tell
him that when he comes," she thought and smiled. But the same instant
she remembered that she had no one now to tell anything amusing to. "And
there’s nothing amusing, nothing mirthful, really. It’s all hateful.
They’re singing for vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses
himself! as if he were afraid of missing something. Why these churches
and this singing and this humbug? Simply to conceal that we all hate
each other like these cab drivers who are abusing each other so angrily.
Yashvin says, ‘He wants to strip me of my shirt, and I him of his.’ Yes,
that’s the truth!"

"My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while his is waning
and waning, and that’s why we’re drifting apart." She went on musing.
"And there’s no help for it. He is everything for me, and I want him
more and more to give himself up to me entirely. And he wants more and
more to get away from me. We walked to meet each other up to the time of
our love, and then we have been irresistibly drifting in different
directions. And there’s no altering that. He tells me I’m insanely
jealous, and I have told myself that I am insanely jealous; but it’s not
true. I’m not jealous, but I’m unsatisfied. But..." she opened her lips,
and shifted her place in the carriage in the excitement, aroused by the
thought that suddenly struck her. "If I could be anything but a
mistress, passionately caring for nothing but his caresses; but I can’t
and I don’t care to be anything else. And by that desire I rouse
aversion in him, and he rouses fury in me, and it cannot be different.
Don’t I know that he wouldn’t deceive me, that he has no schemes about
Princess Sorokina, that he’s not in love with Kitty, that he won’t
desert me! I know all that, but it makes it no better for me. If without
loving me, from _duty_ he’ll be good and kind to me, without what I
want, that’s a thousand times worse than unkindness! That’s—hell! And
that’s just how it is. For a long while now he hasn’t loved me. And
where love ends, hate begins. I don’t know these streets at all. Hills
it seems, and still houses, and houses .... And in the houses always
people and people.... How many of them, no end, and all hating each
other! Come, let me try and think what I want, to make me happy. Well?
Suppose I am divorced, and Alexey Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha,
and I marry Vronsky." Thinking of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she at once
pictured him with extraordinary vividness as though he were alive before
her, with his mild, lifeless, dull eyes, the blue veins in his white
hands, his intonations and the cracking of his fingers, and remembering
the feeling which had existed between them, and which was also called
love, she shuddered with loathing. "Well, I’m divorced, and become
Vronsky’s wife. Well, will Kitty cease looking at me as she looked at me
today? No. And will Seryozha leave off asking and wondering about my two
husbands? And is there any new feeling I can awaken between Vronsky and
me? Is there possible, if not happiness, some sort of ease from misery?
No, no!" she answered now without the slightest hesitation. "Impossible!
We are drawn apart by life, and I make his unhappiness, and he mine, and
there’s no altering him or me. Every attempt has been made, the screw
has come unscrewed. Oh, a beggar woman with a baby. She thinks I’m sorry
for her. Aren’t we all flung into the world only to hate each other, and
so to torture ourselves and each other? Schoolboys coming—laughing
Seryozha?" she thought. "I thought, too, that I loved him, and used to
be touched by my own tenderness. But I have lived without him, I gave
him up for another love, and did not regret the exchange till that love
was satisfied." And with loathing she thought of what she meant by that
love. And the clearness with which she saw life now, her own and all
men’s, was a pleasure to her. "It’s so with me and Pyotr, and the
coachman, Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the people living along the
Volga, where those placards invite one to go, and everywhere and
always," she thought when she had driven under the low-pitched roof of
the Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet her.

Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to send to meet
him, as he did not know when he should be able to leave Moscow. Levin
was not at home when Katavasov and Sergey Ivanovitch in a fly hired at
the station drove up to the steps of the Pokrovskoe house, as black as
Moors from the dust of the road. Kitty, sitting on the balcony with her
father and sister, recognized her brother-in-law, and ran down to meet
him.

"Oh, I don’t know, like everybody else," Kitty answered, a little
embarrassed, looking round at Sergey Ivanovitch. "I’ll send to fetch
him. Papa’s staying with us. He’s only just come home from abroad."

And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to wash,
one in his room and the other in what had been Dolly’s, and giving
orders for their luncheon, Kitty ran out onto the balcony, enjoying the
freedom, and rapidity of movement, of which she had been deprived during
the months of her pregnancy.

"No, papa, he’s very nice, and Kostya’s very fond of him," Kitty said,
with a deprecating smile, noticing the irony on her father’s face.

"You go to them, darling," said Kitty to her sister, "and entertain
them. They saw Stiva at the station; he was quite well. And I must run
to Mitya. As ill-luck would have it, I haven’t fed him since tea. He’s
awake now, and sure to be screaming." And feeling a rush of milk, she
hurried to the nursery.

"Has he been screaming long, nurse, very long?" said Kitty hurriedly,
seating herself on a chair, and preparing to give the baby the breast.
"But give me him quickly. Oh, nurse, how tiresome you are! There, tie
the cap afterwards, do!"

But Kitty did not hear her words. Her impatience kept growing, like the
baby’s.

"But poor darling, he’s all in perspiration!" said Kitty in a whisper,
touching the baby.

"Impossible! If he knew anyone, he would have known me," said Kitty, in
response to Agafea Mihalovna’s statement, and she smiled.

"Well, well; then we shall see," whispered Kitty. "But now go away, he’s
going to sleep."

"Yes, yes, sh—sh—sh—" was all Kitty answered, rocking a little, and
tenderly squeezing the plump little arm, with rolls of fat at the wrist,
which Mitya still waved feebly as he opened and shut his eyes. That hand
worried Kitty; she longed to kiss the little hand, but was afraid to for
fear of waking the baby. At last the little hand ceased waving, and the
eyes closed. Only from time to time, as he went on sucking, the baby
raised his long, curly eyelashes and peeped at his mother with wet eyes,
that looked black in the twilight. The nurse had left off fanning, and
was dozing. From above came the peals of the old prince’s voice, and the
chuckle of Katavasov.

"They have got into talk without me," thought Kitty, "but still it’s
vexing that Kostya’s out. He’s sure to have gone to the bee house again.
Though it’s a pity he’s there so often, still I’m glad. It distracts his
mind. He’s become altogether happier and better now than in the spring.
He used to be so gloomy and worried that I felt frightened for him. And
how absurd he is!" she whispered, smiling.

"What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort for all this year?"
she wondered. "If it’s all written in those books, he can understand
them. If it’s all wrong, why does he read them? He says himself that he
would like to believe. Then why is it he doesn’t believe? Surely from
his thinking so much? And he thinks so much from being solitary. He’s
always alone, alone. He can’t talk about it all to us. I fancy he’ll be
glad of these visitors, especially Katavasov. He likes discussions with
them," she thought, and passed instantly to the consideration of where
it would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or to share
Sergey Ivanovitch’s room. And then an idea suddenly struck her, which
made her shudder and even disturb Mitya, who glanced severely at her. "I
do believe the laundress hasn’t sent the washing yet, and all the best
sheets are in use. If I don’t see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will give
Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong sheets," and at the very idea of this the
blood rushed to Kitty’s face.

And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to her mind. A
fortnight ago a penitent letter had come from Stepan Arkadyevitch to
Dolly. He besought her to save his honor, to sell her estate to pay his
debts. Dolly was in despair, she detested her husband, despised him,
pitied him, resolved on a separation, resolved to refuse, but ended by
agreeing to sell part of her property. After that, with an irrepressible
smile of tenderness, Kitty recalled her husband’s shamefaced
embarrassment, his repeated awkward efforts to approach the subject, and
how at last, having thought of the one means of helping Dolly without
wounding her pride, he had suggested to Kitty—what had not occurred to
her before—that she should give up her share of the property.

Under every article of faith of the church could be put the faith in the
service of truth instead of one’s desires. And each doctrine did not
simply leave that faith unshaken, each doctrine seemed essential to
complete that great miracle, continually manifest upon earth, that made
it possible for each man and millions of different sorts of men, wise
men and imbeciles, old men and children—all men, peasants, Lvov, Kitty,
beggars and kings to understand perfectly the same one thing, and to
build up thereby that life of the soul which alone is worth living, and
which alone is precious to us.

"With my brother there will be none of that aloofness there always used
to be between us, there will be no disputes; with Kitty there shall
never be quarrels; with the visitor, whoever he may be, I will be
friendly and nice; with the servants, with Ivan, it will all be
different."

They were at the other end of the copse under an old lime-tree; they
were calling him. Two figures in dark dresses (they had been light
summer dresses when they started out) were standing bending over
something. It was Kitty with the nurse. The rain was already ceasing,
and it was beginning to get light when Levin reached them. The nurse was
not wet on the lower part of her dress, but Kitty was drenched through,
and her soaked clothes clung to her. Though the rain was over, they
still stood in the same position in which they had been standing when
the storm broke. Both stood bending over a perambulator with a green
umbrella.

Kitty’s rosy wet face was turned towards him, and she smiled timidly
under her shapeless sopped hat.

"It wasn’t my fault, really. We were just meaning to go, when he made
such a to-do that we had to change him. We were just..." Kitty began
defending herself.

Kitty was the only one who did not hear it all—she was summoned to give
Mitya his bath.

A few minutes after Kitty had left the room she sent for Levin to come
to the nursery.

Although he had been much interested by Sergey Ivanovitch’s views of the
new epoch in history that would be created by the emancipation of forty
millions of men of Slavonic race acting with Russia, a conception quite
new to him, and although he was disturbed by uneasy wonder at being sent
for by Kitty, as soon as he came out of the drawing room and was alone,
his mind reverted at once to the thoughts of the morning. And all the
theories of the significance of the Slav element in the history of the
world seemed to him so trivial compared with what was passing in his own
soul, that he instantly forgot it all and dropped back into the same
frame of mind that he had been in that morning.

Kitty was standing with her sleeves tucked up over the baby in the bath.
Hearing her husband’s footstep, she turned towards him, summoning him to
her with her smile. With one hand she was supporting the fat baby that
lay floating and sprawling on its back, while with the other she
squeezed the sponge over him.

As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment was tried, and it
was completely successful. The cook, sent for with this object, bent
over the baby. He frowned and shook his head disapprovingly. Kitty bent
down to him, he gave her a beaming smile, propped his little hands on
the sponge and chirruped, making such a queer little contented sound
with his lips, that Kitty and the nurse were not alone in their
admiration. Levin, too, was surprised and delighted.

"Well, I am glad you are beginning to love him," said Kitty to her
husband, when she had settled herself comfortably in her usual place,
with the baby at her breast. "I am so glad! It had begun to distress me.
You said you had no feeling for him."

Kitty’s smile was radiant.

"Oh, you haven’t gone in then?" he heard Kitty’s voice all at once, as
she came by the same way to the drawing-room.

