"Why, it’s actually you, Levin, at last!" he said with a friendly
mocking smile, scanning Levin as he approached. "How is it you have
deigned to look me up in this den?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and not
content with shaking hands, he kissed his friend. "Have you been here
long?"

"I have just come, and very much wanted to see you," said Levin, looking
shyly and at the same time angrily and uneasily around.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was on familiar terms with almost all his
acquaintances, and called almost all of them by their Christian names:
old men of sixty, boys of twenty, actors, ministers, merchants, and
adjutant-generals, so that many of his intimate chums were to be found
at the extreme ends of the social ladder, and would have been very much
surprised to learn that they had, through the medium of Oblonsky,
something in common. He was the familiar friend of everyone with whom he
took a glass of champagne, and he took a glass of champagne with
everyone, and when in consequence he met any of his disreputable chums,
as he used in joke to call many of his friends, in the presence of his
subordinates, he well knew how, with his characteristic tact, to
diminish the disagreeable impression made on them. Levin was not a
disreputable chum, but Oblonsky, with his ready tact, felt that Levin
fancied he might not care to show his intimacy with him before his
subordinates, and so he made haste to take him off into his room.

Levin was almost of the same age as Oblonsky; their intimacy did not
rest merely on champagne. Levin had been the friend and companion of his
early youth. They were fond of one another in spite of the difference of
their characters and tastes, as friends are fond of one another who have
been together in early youth. But in spite of this, each of them—as is
often the way with men who have selected careers of different
kinds—though in discussion he would even justify the other’s career, in
his heart despised it. It seemed to each of them that the life he led
himself was the only real life, and the life led by his friend was a
mere phantasm. Oblonsky could not restrain a slight mocking smile at the
sight of Levin. How often he had seen him come up to Moscow from the
country where he was doing something, but what precisely Stepan
Arkadyevitch could never quite make out, and indeed he took no interest
in the matter. Levin arrived in Moscow always excited and in a hurry,
rather ill at ease and irritated by his own want of ease, and for the
most part with a perfectly new, unexpected view of things. Stepan
Arkadyevitch laughed at this, and liked it. In the same way Levin in his
heart despised the town mode of life of his friend, and his official
duties, which he laughed at, and regarded as trifling. But the
difference was that Oblonsky, as he was doing the same as every one did,
laughed complacently and good-humoredly, while Levin laughed without
complacency and sometimes angrily.

"We have long been expecting you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going into
his room and letting Levin’s hand go as though to show that here all
danger was over. "I am very, very glad to see you," he went on. "Well,
how are you? Eh? When did you come?"

Levin was silent, looking at the unknown faces of Oblonsky’s two
companions, and especially at the hand of the elegant Grinevitch, which
had such long white fingers, such long yellow filbert-shaped nails, and
such huge shining studs on the shirt-cuff, that apparently they absorbed
all his attention, and allowed him no freedom of thought. Oblonsky
noticed this at once, and smiled.

"Ah, to be sure, let me introduce you," he said. "My colleagues: Philip
Ivanitch Nikitin, Mihail Stanislavitch Grinevitch"—and turning to
Levin—"a district councilor, a modern district councilman, a gymnast who
lifts thirteen stone with one hand, a cattle-breeder and sportsman, and
my friend, Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, the brother of Sergey
Ivanovitch Koznishev."

Levin frowned, shook hands coldly, and at once turned to Oblonsky.
Though he had a great respect for his half-brother, an author well known
to all Russia, he could not endure it when people treated him not as
Konstantin Levin, but as the brother of the celebrated Koznishev.

"It’s a long story. I will tell you some time," said Levin, but he began
telling him at once. "Well, to put it shortly, I was convinced that
nothing was really done by the district councils, or ever could be," he
began, as though some one had just insulted him. "On one side it’s a
plaything; they play at being a parliament, and I’m neither young enough
nor old enough to find amusement in playthings; and on the other side"
(he stammered) "it’s a means for the coterie of the district to make
money. Formerly they had wardships, courts of justice, now they have the
district council—not in the form of bribes, but in the form of unearned
salary," he said, as hotly as though someone of those present had
opposed his opinion.

"Yes, later. But I wanted to see you," said Levin, looking with hatred
at Grinevitch’s hand.

Levin suddenly blushed, not as grown men blush, slightly, without being
themselves aware of it, but as boys blush, feeling that they are
ridiculous through their shyness, and consequently ashamed of it and
blushing still more, almost to the point of tears. And it was so strange
to see this sensible, manly face in such a childish plight, that
Oblonsky left off looking at him.

"Oh, where shall we meet? You know I want very much to talk to you,"
said Levin.

"No," answered Levin, after an instant’s thought, "I have got to go on
somewhere else."

"Well, it’s this," said Levin; "but it’s of no importance, though."

Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had long known that Levin was in love with his
sister-in-law, Kitty, gave a hardly perceptible smile, and his eyes
sparkled merrily.

The secretary retired in confusion. During the consultation with the
secretary Levin had completely recovered from his embarrassment. He was
standing with his elbows on the back of a chair, and on his face was a
look of ironical attention.

"What don’t you understand?" said Oblonsky, smiling as brightly as ever,
and picking up a cigarette. He expected some queer outburst from Levin.

"I don’t understand what you are doing," said Levin, shrugging his
shoulders. "How can you do it seriously?"

"On paper. But, there, you’ve a gift for it," added Levin.

"Perhaps so," said Levin. "But all the same I admire your grandeur, and
am proud that I’ve a friend in such a great person. You’ve not answered
my question, though," he went on, with a desperate effort looking
Oblonsky straight in the face.

"Oh, why so?" Levin queried, panic-stricken.

"Oh, we’ll talk about that, too, later on," said Levin, reddening again
up to his ears.

And Levin went out of the room, only when he was in the doorway
remembering that he had forgotten to take leave of Oblonsky’s
colleagues.

"That gentleman must be a man of great energy," said Grinevitch, when
Levin had gone away.

When Oblonsky asked Levin what had brought him to town, Levin blushed,
and was furious with himself for blushing, because he could not answer,
"I have come to make your sister-in-law an offer," though that was
precisely what he had come for.

The families of the Levins and the Shtcherbatskys were old, noble Moscow
families, and had always been on intimate and friendly terms. This
intimacy had grown still closer during Levin’s student days. He had both
prepared for the university with the young Prince Shtcherbatsky, the
brother of Kitty and Dolly, and had entered at the same time with him.
In those days Levin used often to be in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and
he was in love with the Shtcherbatsky household. Strange as it may
appear, it was with the household, the family, that Konstantin Levin was
in love, especially with the feminine half of the household. Levin did
not remember his own mother, and his only sister was older than he was,
so that it was in the Shtcherbatskys’ house that he saw for the first
time that inner life of an old, noble, cultivated, and honorable family
of which he had been deprived by the death of his father and mother. All
the members of that family, especially the feminine half, were pictured
by him, as it were, wrapped about with a mysterious poetical veil, and
he not only perceived no defects whatever in them, but under the
poetical veil that shrouded them he assumed the existence of the
loftiest sentiments and every possible perfection. Why it was the three
young ladies had one day to speak French, and the next English; why it
was that at certain hours they played by turns on the piano, the sounds
of which were audible in their brother’s room above, where the students
used to work; why they were visited by those professors of French
literature, of music, of drawing, of dancing; why at certain hours all
the three young ladies, with Mademoiselle Linon, drove in the coach to
the Tversky boulevard, dressed in their satin cloaks, Dolly in a long
one, Natalia in a half-long one, and Kitty in one so short that her
shapely legs in tightly-drawn red stockings were visible to all
beholders; why it was they had to walk about the Tversky boulevard
escorted by a footman with a gold cockade in his hat—all this and much
more that was done in their mysterious world he did not understand, but
he was sure that everything that was done there was very good, and he
was in love precisely with the mystery of the proceedings.

In his student days he had all but been in love with the eldest, Dolly,
but she was soon married to Oblonsky. Then he began being in love with
the second. He felt, as it were, that he had to be in love with one of
the sisters, only he could not quite make out which. But Natalia, too,
had hardly made her appearance in the world when she married the
diplomat Lvov. Kitty was still a child when Levin left the university.
Young Shtcherbatsky went into the navy, was drowned in the Baltic, and
Levin’s relations with the Shtcherbatskys, in spite of his friendship
with Oblonsky, became less intimate. But when early in the winter of
this year Levin came to Moscow, after a year in the country, and saw the
Shtcherbatskys, he realized which of the three sisters he was indeed
destined to love.

One would have thought that nothing could be simpler than for him, a man
of good family, rather rich than poor, and thirty-two years old, to make
the young Princess Shtcherbatskaya an offer of marriage; in all
likelihood he would at once have been looked upon as a good match. But
Levin was in love, and so it seemed to him that Kitty was so perfect in
every respect that she was a creature far above everything earthly; and
that he was a creature so low and so earthly that it could not even be
conceived that other people and she herself could regard him as worthy
of her.

Levin’s conviction that it could not be was founded on the idea that in
the eyes of her family he was a disadvantageous and worthless match for
the charming Kitty, and that Kitty herself could not love him. In her
family’s eyes he had no ordinary, definite career and position in
society, while his contemporaries by this time, when he was thirty-two,
were already, one a colonel, and another a professor, another director
of a bank and railways, or president of a board like Oblonsky. But he
(he knew very well how he must appear to others) was a country
gentleman, occupied in breeding cattle, shooting game, and building
barns; in other words, a fellow of no ability, who had not turned out
well, and who was doing just what, according to the ideas of the world,
is done by people fit for nothing else.

On arriving in Moscow by a morning train, Levin had put up at the house
of his elder half-brother, Koznishev. After changing his clothes he went
down to his brother’s study, intending to talk to him at once about the
object of his visit, and to ask his advice; but his brother was not
alone. With him there was a well-known professor of philosophy, who had
come from Harkov expressly to clear up a difference that had arisen
between them on a very important philosophical question. The professor
was carrying on a hot crusade against materialists. Sergey Koznishev had
been following this crusade with interest, and after reading the
professor’s last article, he had written him a letter stating his
objections. He accused the professor of making too great concessions to
the materialists. And the professor had promptly appeared to argue the
matter out. The point in discussion was the question then in vogue: Is
there a line to be drawn between psychological and physiological
phenomena in man? and if so, where?

A little man in spectacles, with a narrow forehead, tore himself from
the discussion for an instant to greet Levin, and then went on talking
without paying any further attention to him. Levin sat down to wait till
the professor should go, but he soon began to get interested in the
subject under discussion.

Levin had come across the magazine articles about which they were
disputing, and had read them, interested in them as a development of the
first principles of science, familiar to him as a natural science
student at the university. But he had never connected these scientific
deductions as to the origin of man as an animal, as to reflex action,
biology, and sociology, with those questions as to the meaning of life
and death to himself, which had of late been more and more often in his
mind.

But here it seemed to Levin that just as they were close upon the real
point of the matter, they were again retreating, and he made up his mind
to put a question to the professor.

Levin listened no more, and simply waited for the professor to go.

Levin knew that his elder brother took little interest in farming, and
only put the question in deference to him, and so he only told him about
the sale of his wheat and money matters.

Levin had meant to tell his brother of his determination to get married,
and to ask his advice; he had indeed firmly resolved to do so. But after
seeing his brother, listening to his conversation with the professor,
hearing afterwards the unconsciously patronizing tone in which his
brother questioned him about agricultural matters (their mother’s
property had not been divided, and Levin took charge of both their
shares), Levin felt that he could not for some reason begin to talk to
him of his intention of marrying. He felt that his brother would not
look at it as he would have wished him to.

"No, I’m not a member now; I’ve resigned," answered Levin, "and I no
longer attend the meetings."

Levin in self-defense began to describe what took place in the meetings
in his district.

"But how can it be helped?" said Levin penitently. "It was my last
effort. And I did try with all my soul. I can’t. I’m no good at it."

"Perhaps not," Levin answered dejectedly.

This brother Nikolay was the elder brother of Konstantin Levin, and
half-brother of Sergey Ivanovitch; a man utterly ruined, who had
dissipated the greater part of his fortune, was living in the strangest
and lowest company, and had quarreled with his brothers.

"What did you say?" Levin cried with horror. "How do you know?"

"Here in Moscow? Where is he? Do you know?" Levin got up from his chair,
as though on the point of starting off at once.

Levin read in the queer, familiar handwriting: "I humbly beg you to
leave me in peace. That’s the only favor I ask of my gracious
brothers.—Nikolay Levin."

Levin read it, and without raising his head stood with the note in his
hands opposite Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Yes, yes," repeated Levin. "I understand and appreciate your attitude
to him; but I shall go and see him."

"Oh, it’s awful, awful!" repeated Levin.

After obtaining his brother’s address from Sergey Ivanovitch’s footman,
Levin was on the point of setting off at once to see him, but on second
thought he decided to put off his visit till the evening. The first
thing to do to set his heart at rest was to accomplish what he had come
to Moscow for. From his brother’s Levin went to Oblonsky’s office, and
on getting news of the Shtcherbatskys from him, he drove to the place
where he had been told he might find Kitty.

At four o’clock, conscious of his throbbing heart, Levin stepped out of
a hired sledge at the Zoological Gardens, and turned along the path to
the frozen mounds and the skating ground, knowing that he would
certainly find her there, as he had seen the Shtcherbatskys’ carriage at
the entrance.

He walked along the path towards the skating-ground, and kept saying to
himself—"You mustn’t be excited, you must be calm. What’s the matter
with you? What do you want? Be quiet, stupid," he conjured his heart.
And the more he tried to compose himself, the more breathless he found
himself. An acquaintance met him and called him by his name, but Levin
did not even recognize him. He went towards the mounds, whence came the
clank of the chains of sledges as they slipped down or were dragged up,
the rumble of the sliding sledges, and the sounds of merry voices. He
walked on a few steps, and the skating-ground lay open before his eyes,
and at once, amidst all the skaters, he knew her.

He knew she was there by the rapture and the terror that seized on his
heart. She was standing talking to a lady at the opposite end of the
ground. There was apparently nothing striking either in her dress or her
attitude. But for Levin she was as easy to find in that crowd as a rose
among nettles. Everything was made bright by her. She was the smile that
shed light on all round her. "Is it possible I can go over there on the
ice, go up to her?" he thought. The place where she stood seemed to him
a holy shrine, unapproachable, and there was one moment when he was
almost retreating, so overwhelmed was he with terror. He had to make an
effort to master himself, and to remind himself that people of all sorts
were moving about her, and that he too might come there to skate. He
walked down, for a long while avoiding looking at her as at the sun, but
seeing her, as one does the sun, without looking.

On that day of the week and at that time of day people of one set, all
acquainted with one another, used to meet on the ice. There were crack
skaters there, showing off their skill, and learners clinging to chairs
with timid, awkward movements, boys, and elderly people skating with
hygienic motives. They seemed to Levin an elect band of blissful beings
because they were here, near her. All the skaters, it seemed, with
perfect self-possession, skated towards her, skated by her, even spoke
to her, and were happy, quite apart from her, enjoying the capital ice
and the fine weather.

Nikolay Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in a short jacket and tight
trousers, was sitting on a garden seat with his skates on. Seeing Levin,
he shouted to him:

"I haven’t got my skates," Levin answered, marveling at this boldness
and ease in her presence, and not for one second losing sight of her,
though he did not look at her. He felt as though the sun were coming
near him. She was in a corner, and turning out her slender feet in their
high boots with obvious timidity, she skated towards him. A boy in
Russian dress, desperately waving his arms and bowed down to the ground,
overtook her. She skated a little uncertainly; taking her hands out of
the little muff that hung on a cord, she held them ready for emergency,
and looking towards Levin, whom she had recognized, she smiled at him,
and at her own fears. When she had got round the turn, she gave herself
a push off with one foot, and skated straight up to Shtcherbatsky.
Clutching at his arm, she nodded smiling to Levin. She was more splendid
than he had imagined her.

When he thought of her, he could call up a vivid picture of her to
himself, especially the charm of that little fair head, so freely set on
the shapely girlish shoulders, and so full of childish brightness and
good humor. The childishness of her expression, together with the
delicate beauty of her figure, made up her special charm, and that he
fully realized. But what always struck him in her as something unlooked
for, was the expression of her eyes, soft, serene, and truthful, and
above all, her smile, which always transported Levin to an enchanted
world, where he felt himself softened and tender, as he remembered
himself in some days of his early childhood.

"I? I’ve not long ... yesterday ... I mean today ... I arrived,"
answered Levin, in his emotion not at once understanding her question.
"I was meaning to come and see you," he said; and then, recollecting
with what intention he was trying to see her, he was promptly overcome
with confusion and blushed.

"Skate together! Can that be possible?" thought Levin, gazing at her.

"Oh, yes, yes; make haste, please," answered Levin, with difficulty
restraining the smile of rapture which would overspread his face. "Yes,"
he thought, "this now is life, this is happiness! _Together,_ she said;
_let us skate together!_ Speak to her now? But that’s just why I’m
afraid to speak—because I’m happy now, happy in hope, anyway.... And
then?.... But I must! I must! I must! Away with weakness!"

Levin rose to his feet, took off his overcoat, and scurrying over the
rough ice round the hut, came out on the smooth ice and skated without
effort, as it were, by simple exercise of will, increasing and
slackening speed and turning his course. He approached with timidity,
but again her smile reassured him.

"And I have confidence in myself when you are leaning on me," he said,
but was at once panic-stricken at what he had said, and blushed. And
indeed, no sooner had he uttered these words, when all at once, like the
sun going behind a cloud, her face lost all its friendliness, and Levin
detected the familiar change in her expression that denoted the working
of thought; a crease showed on her smooth brow.

"What’s wrong? I have offended her. Lord help me!" thought Levin, and he
flew towards the old Frenchwoman with the gray ringlets, who was sitting
on a bench. Smiling and showing her false teeth, she greeted him as an
old friend.

When Levin darted up to Kitty her face was no longer stern; her eyes
looked at him with the same sincerity and friendliness, but Levin
fancied that in her friendliness there was a certain note of deliberate
composure. And he felt depressed. After talking a little of her old
governess and her peculiarities, she questioned him about his life.

"My God! what have I done! Merciful God! help me, guide me," said Levin,
praying inwardly, and at the same time, feeling a need of violent
exercise, he skated about describing inner and outer circles.

"Ah, that’s a new trick!" said Levin, and he promptly ran up to the top
to do this new trick.

Levin went to the steps, took a run from above as best he could, and
dashed down, preserving his balance in this unwonted movement with his
hands. On the last step he stumbled, but barely touching the ice with
his hand, with a violent effort recovered himself, and skated off,
laughing.

Catching sight of Kitty going away, and her mother meeting her at the
steps, Levin, flushed from his rapid exercise, stood still and pondered
a minute. He took off his skates, and overtook the mother and daughter
at the entrance of the gardens.

At that moment Stepan Arkadyevitch, his hat cocked on one side, with
beaming face and eyes, strode into the garden like a conquering hero.
But as he approached his mother-in-law, he responded in a mournful and
crestfallen tone to her inquiries about Dolly’s health. After a little
subdued and dejected conversation with his mother-in-law, he threw out
his chest again, and put his arm in Levin’s.

"Yes, come along," answered Levin in ecstasy, hearing unceasingly the
sound of that voice saying, "Good-bye till this evening," and seeing the
smile with which it was said.

The friends hardly spoke all the way. Levin was wondering what that
change in Kitty’s expression had meant, and alternately assuring himself
that there was hope, and falling into despair, seeing clearly that his
hopes were insane, and yet all the while he felt himself quite another
man, utterly unlike what he had been before her smile and those words,
"Good-bye till this evening."

"You like turbot, don’t you?" he said to Levin as they were arriving.

"Eh?" responded Levin. "Turbot? Yes, I’m _awfully_ fond of turbot."

When Levin went into the restaurant with Oblonsky, he could not help
noticing a certain peculiarity of expression, as it were, a restrained
radiance, about the face and whole figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Oblonsky took off his overcoat, and with his hat over one ear walked
into the dining room, giving directions to the Tatar waiters, who were
clustered about him in evening coats, bearing napkins. Bowing to right
and left to the people he met, and here as everywhere joyously greeting
acquaintances, he went up to the sideboard for a preliminary appetizer
of fish and vodka, and said to the painted Frenchwoman decked in
ribbons, lace, and ringlets, behind the counter, something so amusing
that even that Frenchwoman was moved to genuine laughter. Levin for his
part refrained from taking any vodka simply because he felt such a
loathing of that Frenchwoman, all made up, it seemed, of false hair,
_poudre de riz,_ and _vinaigre de toilette_. He made haste to move away
from her, as from a dirty place. His whole soul was filled with memories
of Kitty, and there was a smile of triumph and happiness shining in his
eyes.

"This way, your excellency, please. Your excellency won’t be disturbed
here," said a particularly pertinacious, white-headed old Tatar with
immense hips and coat-tails gaping widely behind. "Walk in, your
excellency," he said to Levin; by way of showing his respect to Stepan
Arkadyevitch, being attentive to his guest as well.

"How if we were to change our program, Levin?" he said, keeping his
finger on the bill of fare. And his face expressed serious hesitation.
"Are the oysters good? Mind now."

"_Porridge à la Russe,_ your honor would like?" said the Tatar, bending
down to Levin, like a nurse speaking to a child.

"What you like, only not too much. Champagne," said Levin.

"No, it’s all the same to me," said Levin, unable to suppress a smile.

"Not bad," he said, stripping the oysters from the pearly shell with a
silver fork, and swallowing them one after another. "Not bad," he
repeated, turning his dewy, brilliant eyes from Levin to the Tatar.

Levin ate the oysters indeed, though white bread and cheese would have
pleased him better. But he was admiring Oblonsky. Even the Tatar,
uncorking the bottle and pouring the sparkling wine into the delicate
glasses, glanced at Stepan Arkadyevitch, and settled his white cravat
with a perceptible smile of satisfaction.

He wanted Levin to be in good spirits. But it was not that Levin was not
in good spirits; he was ill at ease. With what he had in his soul, he
felt sore and uncomfortable in the restaurant, in the midst of private
rooms where men were dining with ladies, in all this fuss and bustle;
the surroundings of bronzes, looking glasses, gas, and waiters—all of it
was offensive to him. He was afraid of sullying what his soul was
brimful of.

"It’s too much for me," responded Levin. "Do try, now, and put yourself
in my place, take the point of view of a country person. We in the
country try to bring our hands into such a state as will be most
convenient for working with. So we cut our nails; sometimes we turn up
our sleeves. And here people purposely let their nails grow as long as
they will, and link on small saucers by way of studs, so that they can
do nothing with their hands."

"And so you are a savage. All you Levins are savages."

Levin sighed. He remembered his brother Nikolay, and felt ashamed and
sore, and he scowled; but Oblonsky began speaking of a subject which at
once drew his attention.

"Yes, I shall certainly go," replied Levin; "though I fancied the
princess was not very warm in her invitation."

"Yes," said Levin, slowly and with emotion, "you’re right. I am a
savage. Only, my savageness is not in having gone away, but in coming
now. Now I have come..."

"Oh, what a lucky fellow you are!" broke in Stepan Arkadyevitch, looking
into Levin’s eyes.

"You guess?" responded Levin, his eyes like deep wells of light fixed on
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I guess, but I can’t be the first to talk about it. You can see by that
whether I guess right or wrong," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, gazing at
Levin with a subtle smile.

"Well, and what have you to say to me?" said Levin in a quivering voice,
feeling that all the muscles of his face were quivering too. "How do you
look at the question?"

Stepan Arkadyevitch slowly emptied his glass of Chablis, never taking
his eyes off Levin.

"But you’re not making a mistake? You know what we’re speaking of?" said
Levin, piercing him with his eyes. "You think it’s possible?"

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He so well knew that feeling of Levin’s,
that for him all the girls in the world were divided into two classes:
one class—all the girls in the world except her, and those girls with
all sorts of human weaknesses, and very ordinary girls: the other
class—she alone, having no weaknesses of any sort and higher than all
humanity.

"Stay, take some sauce," he said, holding back Levin’s hand as it pushed
away the sauce.

Levin obediently helped himself to sauce, but would not let Stepan
Arkadyevitch go on with his dinner.

At these words Levin’s face suddenly lighted up with a smile, a smile
not far from tears of emotion.

"She says that!" cried Levin. "I always said she was exquisite, your
wife. There, that’s enough, enough said about it," he said, getting up
from his seat.

But Levin could not sit down. He walked with his firm tread twice up and
down the little cage of a room, blinked his eyelids that his tears might
not fall, and only then sat down to the table.

"Alas! all the same," said Levin, "when with loathing I go over my life,
I shudder and curse and bitterly regret it.... Yes."

Levin emptied his glass, and they were silent for a while.

"There’s one other thing I ought to tell you. Do you know Vronsky?"
Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Levin.

"Who’s Vronsky?" said Levin, and his face was suddenly transformed from
the look of childlike ecstasy which Oblonsky had just been admiring to
an angry and unpleasant expression.

Levin scowled and was dumb.

"Excuse me, but I know nothing," said Levin, frowning gloomily. And
immediately he recollected his brother Nikolay and how hateful he was to
have been able to forget him.

Levin dropped back in his chair; his face was pale.

"No, thanks, I can’t drink any more," said Levin, pushing away his
glass. "I shall be drunk.... Come, tell me how are you getting on?" he
went on, obviously anxious to change the conversation.

"Oh, do you still think of coming to me for some shooting? Come next
spring, do," said Levin.

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He knew what was passing in Levin’s soul.

As he said this, Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled subtly. Levin, too, could
not help smiling.

Levin half smiled.

At that instant Levin recollected his own sins and the inner conflict he
had lived through. And he added unexpectedly:

Levin sighed and made no reply. He was thinking of his own affairs, and
did not hear Oblonsky.

"Bill!" he called, and he went into the next room where he promptly came
across an aide-de-camp of his acquaintance and dropped into conversation
with him about an actress and her protector. And at once in the
conversation with the aide-de-camp Oblonsky had a sense of relaxation
and relief after the conversation with Levin, which always put him to
too great a mental and spiritual strain.

When the Tatar appeared with a bill for twenty-six roubles and odd
kopecks, besides a tip for himself, Levin, who would another time have
been horrified, like any one from the country, at his share of fourteen
roubles, did not notice it, paid, and set off homewards to dress and go
to the Shtcherbatskys’ there to decide his fate.

The young Princess Kitty Shtcherbatskaya was eighteen. It was the first
winter that she had been out in the world. Her success in society had
been greater than that of either of her elder sisters, and greater even
than her mother had anticipated. To say nothing of the young men who
danced at the Moscow balls being almost all in love with Kitty, two
serious suitors had already this first winter made their appearance:
Levin, and immediately after his departure, Count Vronsky.

Levin’s appearance at the beginning of the winter, his frequent visits,
and evident love for Kitty, had led to the first serious conversations
between Kitty’s parents as to her future, and to disputes between them.
The prince was on Levin’s side; he said he wished for nothing better for
Kitty. The princess for her part, going round the question in the manner
peculiar to women, maintained that Kitty was too young, that Levin had
done nothing to prove that he had serious intentions, that Kitty felt no
great attraction to him, and other side issues; but she did not state
the principal point, which was that she looked for a better match for
her daughter, and that Levin was not to her liking, and she did not
understand him. When Levin had abruptly departed, the princess was
delighted, and said to her husband triumphantly: "You see I was right."
When Vronsky appeared on the scene, she was still more delighted,
confirmed in her opinion that Kitty was to make not simply a good, but a
brilliant match.

In the mother’s eyes there could be no comparison between Vronsky and
Levin. She disliked in Levin his strange and uncompromising opinions and
his shyness in society, founded, as she supposed, on his pride and his
queer sort of life, as she considered it, absorbed in cattle and
peasants. She did not very much like it that he, who was in love with
her daughter, had kept coming to the house for six weeks, as though he
were waiting for something, inspecting, as though he were afraid he
might be doing them too great an honor by making an offer, and did not
realize that a man, who continually visits at a house where there is a
young unmarried girl, is bound to make his intentions clear. And
suddenly, without doing so, he disappeared. "It’s as well he’s not
attractive enough for Kitty to have fallen in love with him," thought
the mother.

Kitty had repeated this without attaching any significance to the words.
But her mother saw them in a different light. She knew that the old lady
was expected from day to day, that she would be pleased at her son’s
choice, and she felt it strange that he should not make his offer
through fear of vexing his mother. However, she was so anxious for the
marriage itself, and still more for relief from her fears, that she
believed it was so. Bitter as it was for the princess to see the
unhappiness of her eldest daughter, Dolly, on the point of leaving her
husband, her anxiety over the decision of her youngest daughter’s fate
engrossed all her feelings. Today, with Levin’s reappearance, a fresh
source of anxiety arose. She was afraid that her daughter, who had at
one time, as she fancied, a feeling for Levin, might, from extreme sense
of honor, refuse Vronsky, and that Levin’s arrival might generally
complicate and delay the affair so near being concluded.

"Why, has he been here long?" the princess asked about Levin, as they
returned home.

She felt that this evening, when they would both meet for the first
time, would be a turning point in her life. And she was continually
picturing them to herself, at one moment each separately, and then both
together. When she mused on the past, she dwelt with pleasure, with
tenderness, on the memories of her relations with Levin. The memories of
childhood and of Levin’s friendship with her dead brother gave a special
poetic charm to her relations with him. His love for her, of which she
felt certain, was flattering and delightful to her; and it was pleasant
for her to think of Levin. In her memories of Vronsky there always
entered a certain element of awkwardness, though he was in the highest
degree well-bred and at ease, as though there were some false note—not
in Vronsky, he was very simple and nice, but in herself, while with
Levin she felt perfectly simple and clear. But, on the other hand,
directly she thought of the future with Vronsky, there arose before her
a perspective of brilliant happiness; with Levin the future seemed
misty.

At half-past seven she had only just gone down into the drawing room,
when the footman announced, "Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin." The
princess was still in her room, and the prince had not come in. "So it
is to be," thought Kitty, and all the blood seemed to rush to her heart.
She was horrified at her paleness, as she glanced into the
looking-glass. At that moment she knew beyond doubt that he had come
early on purpose to find her alone and to make her an offer. And only
then for the first time the whole thing presented itself in a new,
different aspect; only then she realized that the question did not
affect her only—with whom she would be happy, and whom she loved—but
that she would have that moment to wound a man whom she liked. And to
wound him cruelly. What for? Because he, dear fellow, loved her, was in
love with her. But there was no help for it, so it must be, so it would
have to be.

But at that very moment the princess came in. There was a look of horror
on her face when she saw them alone, and their disturbed faces. Levin
bowed to her, and said nothing. Kitty did not speak nor lift her eyes.
"Thank God, she has refused him," thought the mother, and her face
lighted up with the habitual smile with which she greeted her guests on
Thursdays. She sat down and began questioning Levin about his life in
the country. He sat down again, waiting for other visitors to arrive, in
order to retreat unnoticed.

She was a thin, sallow, sickly, and nervous woman, with brilliant black
eyes. She was fond of Kitty, and her affection for her showed itself, as
the affection of married women for girls always does, in the desire to
make a match for Kitty after her own ideal of married happiness; she
wanted her to marry Vronsky. Levin she had often met at the
Shtcherbatskys’ early in the winter, and she had always disliked him.
Her invariable and favorite pursuit, when they met, consisted in making
fun of him.

She was right, for Levin actually could not bear her, and despised her
for what she was proud of and regarded as a fine characteristic—her
nervousness, her delicate contempt and indifference for everything
coarse and earthly.

The Countess Nordston and Levin got into that relation with one another
not seldom seen in society, when two persons, who remain externally on
friendly terms, despise each other to such a degree that they cannot
even take each other seriously, and cannot even be offended by each
other.

The Countess Nordston pounced upon Levin at once.

"It’s very flattering for me, countess, that you remember my words so
well," responded Levin, who had succeeded in recovering his composure,
and at once from habit dropped into his tone of joking hostility to the
Countess Nordston. "They must certainly make a great impression on you."

And she began talking to Kitty. Awkward as it was for Levin to withdraw
now, it would still have been easier for him to perpetrate this
awkwardness than to remain all the evening and see Kitty, who glanced at
him now and then and avoided his eyes. He was on the point of getting
up, when the princess, noticing that he was silent, addressed him.

At that instant another lady came into the room, and Levin got up.

"That must be Vronsky," thought Levin, and, to be sure of it, glanced at
Kitty. She had already had time to look at Vronsky, and looked round at
Levin. And simply from the look in her eyes, that grew unconsciously
brighter, Levin knew that she loved that man, knew it as surely as if
she had told him so in words. But what sort of a man was he? Now,
whether for good or for ill, Levin could not choose but remain; he must
find out what the man was like whom she loved.

There are people who, on meeting a successful rival, no matter in what,
are at once disposed to turn their backs on everything good in him, and
to see only what is bad. There are people, on the other hand, who desire
above all to find in that lucky rival the qualities by which he has
outstripped them, and seek with a throbbing ache at heart only what is
good. Levin belonged to the second class. But he had no difficulty in
finding what was good and attractive in Vronsky. It was apparent at the
first glance. Vronsky was a squarely built, dark man, not very tall,
with a good-humored, handsome, and exceedingly calm and resolute face.
Everything about his face and figure, from his short-cropped black hair
and freshly shaven chin down to his loosely fitting, brand-new uniform,
was simple and at the same time elegant. Making way for the lady who had
come in, Vronsky went up to the princess and then to Kitty.

As he approached her, his beautiful eyes shone with a specially tender
light, and with a faint, happy, and modestly triumphant smile (so it
seemed to Levin), bowing carefully and respectfully over her, he held
out his small broad hand to her.

Greeting and saying a few words to everyone, he sat down without once
glancing at Levin, who had never taken his eyes off him.

"Let me introduce you," said the princess, indicating Levin. "Konstantin
Dmitrievitch Levin, Count Alexey Kirillovitch Vronsky."

Vronsky got up and, looking cordially at Levin, shook hands with him.

"My words must make a deep impression on you, since you remember them so
well," said Levin, and, suddenly conscious that he had said just the
same thing before, he reddened.

Vronsky looked at Levin and Countess Nordston, and smiled.

"It’s not dull if one has work to do; besides, one’s not dull by
oneself," Levin replied abruptly.

"I am fond of the country," said Vronsky, noticing, and affecting not to
notice, Levin’s tone.

He talked on, addressing both Kitty and Levin, turning his serene,
friendly eyes from one to the other, and saying obviously just what came
into his head.

The conversation did not flag for an instant, so that the princess, who
always kept in reserve, in case a subject should be lacking, two heavy
guns—the relative advantages of classical and of modern education, and
universal military service—had not to move out either of them, while
Countess Nordston had not a chance of chaffing Levin.

Levin wanted to, and could not, take part in the general conversation;
saying to himself every instant, "Now go," he still did not go, as
though waiting for something.

"Very well, next Saturday," answered Countess Nordston. "But you,
Konstantin Dmitrievitch, do you believe in it?" she asked Levin.

"My opinion," answered Levin, "is only that this table-turning simply
proves that educated society—so called—is no higher than the peasants.
They believe in the evil eye, and in witchcraft and omens, while we..."

"Oh, no, Masha, Konstantin Dmitrievitch said he could not believe in
it," said Kitty, blushing for Levin, and Levin saw this, and, still more
exasperated, would have answered, but Vronsky with his bright frank
smile rushed to the support of the conversation, which was threatening
to become disagreeable.

"When electricity was discovered," Levin interrupted hurriedly, "it was
only the phenomenon that was discovered, and it was unknown from what it
proceeded and what were its effects, and ages passed before its
applications were conceived. But the spiritualists have begun with
tables writing for them, and spirits appearing to them, and have only
later started saying that it is an unknown force."

Vronsky listened attentively to Levin, as he always did listen,
obviously interested in his words.

"Why, because with electricity," Levin interrupted again, "every time
you rub tar against wool, a recognized phenomenon is manifested, but in
this case it does not happen every time, and so it follows it is not a
natural phenomenon."

"Do let us try at once, countess," he said; but Levin would finish
saying what he thought.

Levin opened his mouth, was about to say something, reddened, and said
nothing.

Kitty got up to fetch a table, and as she passed, her eyes met Levin’s.
She felt for him with her whole heart, the more because she was pitying
him for suffering of which she was herself the cause. "If you can
forgive me, forgive me," said her eyes, "I am so happy."

"I hate them all, and you, and myself," his eyes responded, and he took
up his hat. But he was not destined to escape. Just as they were
arranging themselves round the table, and Levin was on the point of
retiring, the old prince came in, and after greeting the ladies,
addressed Levin.

"Ah!" he began joyously. "Been here long, my boy? I didn’t even know you
were in town. Very glad to see you." The old prince embraced Levin, and
talking to him did not observe Vronsky, who had risen, and was serenely
waiting till the prince should turn to him.

Kitty felt how distasteful her father’s warmth was to Levin after what
had happened. She saw, too, how coldly her father responded at last to
Vronsky’s bow, and how Vronsky looked with amiable perplexity at her
father, as though trying and failing to understand how and why anyone
could be hostilely disposed towards him, and she flushed.

"I hope you will be there?" he said to Kitty. As soon as the old prince
turned away from him, Levin went out unnoticed, and the last impression
he carried away with him of that evening was the smiling, happy face of
Kitty answering Vronsky’s inquiry about the ball.

At the end of the evening Kitty told her mother of her conversation with
Levin, and in spite of all the pity she felt for Levin, she was glad at
the thought that she had received an _offer_. She had no doubt that she
had acted rightly. But after she had gone to bed, for a long while she
could not sleep. One impression pursued her relentlessly. It was Levin’s
face, with his scowling brows, and his kind eyes looking out in dark
dejection below them, as he stood listening to her father, and glancing
at her and at Vronsky. And she felt so sorry for him that tears came
into her eyes. But immediately she thought of the man for whom she had
given him up. She vividly recalled his manly, resolute face, his noble
self-possession, and the good nature conspicuous in everything towards
everyone. She remembered the love for her of the man she loved, and once
more all was gladness in her soul, and she lay on the pillow, smiling
with happiness. "I’m sorry, I’m sorry; but what could I do? It’s not my
fault," she said to herself; but an inner voice told her something else.
Whether she felt remorse at having won Levin’s love, or at having
refused him, she did not know. But her happiness was poisoned by doubts.
"Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us!"
she repeated to herself, till she fell asleep.

She, pleased and happy after her conversation with her daughter, had
gone to the prince to say good-night as usual, and though she had no
intention of telling him of Levin’s offer and Kitty’s refusal, still she
hinted to her husband that she fancied things were practically settled
with Vronsky, and that he would declare himself so soon as his mother
arrived. And thereupon, at those words, the prince had all at once flown
into a passion, and began to use unseemly language.

"What have you done? I’ll tell you what. First of all, you’re trying to
catch an eligible gentleman, and all Moscow will be talking of it, and
with good reason. If you have evening parties, invite everyone, don’t
pick out the possible suitors. Invite all the young bucks. Engage a
piano player, and let them dance, and not as you do things nowadays,
hunting up good matches. It makes me sick, sick to see it, and you’ve
gone on till you’ve turned the poor wench’s head. Levin’s a thousand
times the better man. As for this little Petersburg swell, they’re
turned out by machinery, all on one pattern, and all precious rubbish.
But if he were a prince of the blood, my daughter need not run after
anyone."

"I don’t suppose; I know. We have eyes for such things, though
women-folk haven’t. I see a man who has serious intentions, that’s
Levin: and I see a peacock, like this feather-head, who’s only amusing
himself."

declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch, just as he had done before to Levin.

"Of course. I’m collecting subscriptions. Oh, did you make the
acquaintance of my friend Levin?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"No," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who felt a great inclination to tell
Vronsky of Levin’s intentions in regard to Kitty. "No, you’ve not got a
true impression of Levin. He’s a very nervous man, and is sometimes out
of humor, it’s true, but then he is often very nice. He’s such a true,
honest nature, and a heart of gold. But yesterday there were special
reasons," pursued Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a meaning smile, totally
oblivious of the genuine sympathy he had felt the day before for his
friend, and feeling the same sympathy now, only for Vronsky. "Yes, there
were reasons why he could not help being either particularly happy or
particularly unhappy."

She smiled at his praise, and continued to look about the room over his
shoulder. She was not like a girl at her first ball, for whom all faces
in the ballroom melt into one vision of fairyland. And she was not a
girl who had gone the stale round of balls till every face in the
ballroom was familiar and tiresome. But she was in the middle stage
between these two; she was excited, and at the same time she had
sufficient self-possession to be able to observe. In the left corner of
the ballroom she saw the cream of society gathered together.
There—incredibly naked—was the beauty Lidi, Korsunsky’s wife; there was
the lady of the house; there shone the bald head of Krivin, always to be
found where the best people were. In that direction gazed the young men,
not venturing to approach. There, too, she descried Stiva, and there she
saw the exquisite figure and head of Anna in a black velvet gown. And
_he_ was there. Kitty had not seen him since the evening she refused
Levin. With her long-sighted eyes, she knew him at once, and was even
aware that he was looking at her.

Vronsky and Kitty waltzed several times round the room. After the first
waltz Kitty went to her mother, and she had hardly time to say a few
words to Countess Nordston when Vronsky came up again for the first
quadrille. During the quadrille nothing of any significance was said:
there was disjointed talk between them of the Korsunskys, husband and
wife, whom he described very amusingly, as delightful children at forty,
and of the future town theater; and only once the conversation touched
her to the quick, when he asked her about Levin, whether he was here,
and added that he liked him so much. But Kitty did not expect much from
the quadrille. She looked forward with a thrill at her heart to the
mazurka. She fancied that in the mazurka everything must be decided. The
fact that he did not during the quadrille ask her for the mazurka did
not trouble her. She felt sure she would dance the mazurka with him as
she had done at former balls, and refused five young men, saying she was
engaged for the mazurka. The whole ball up to the last quadrille was for
Kitty an enchanted vision of delightful colors, sounds, and motions. She
only sat down when she felt too tired and begged for a rest. But as she
was dancing the last quadrille with one of the tiresome young men whom
she could not refuse, she chanced to be vis-a-vis with Vronsky and Anna.
She had not been near Anna again since the beginning of the evening, and
now again she saw her suddenly quite new and surprising. She saw in her
the signs of that excitement of success she knew so well in herself; she
saw that she was intoxicated with the delighted admiration she was
exciting. She knew that feeling and knew its signs, and saw them in
Anna; saw the quivering, flashing light in her eyes, and the smile of
happiness and excitement unconsciously playing on her lips, and the
deliberate grace, precision, and lightness of her movements.

"Yes, there is something in me hateful, repulsive," thought Levin, as he
came away from the Shtcherbatskys’, and walked in the direction of his
brother’s lodgings. "And I don’t get on with other people. Pride, they
say. No, I have no pride. If I had any pride, I should not have put
myself in such a position." And he pictured to himself Vronsky, happy,
good-natured, clever, and self-possessed, certainly never placed in the
awful position in which he had been that evening. "Yes, she was bound to
choose him. So it had to be, and I cannot complain of anyone or
anything. I am myself to blame. What right had I to imagine she would
care to join her life to mine? Who am I and what am I? A nobody, not
wanted by any one, nor of use to anybody." And he recalled his brother
Nikolay, and dwelt with pleasure on the thought of him. "Isn’t he right
that everything in the world is base and loathsome? And are we fair in
our judgment of brother Nikolay? Of course, from the point of view of
Prokofy, seeing him in a torn cloak and tipsy, he’s a despicable person.
But I know him differently. I know his soul, and know that we are like
him. And I, instead of going to seek him out, went out to dinner, and
came here." Levin walked up to a lamppost, read his brother’s address,
which was in his pocketbook, and called a sledge. All the long way to
his brother’s, Levin vividly recalled all the facts familiar to him of
his brother Nikolay’s life. He remembered how his brother, while at the
university, and for a year afterwards, had, in spite of the jeers of his
companions, lived like a monk, strictly observing all religious rites,
services, and fasts, and avoiding every sort of pleasure, especially
women. And afterwards, how he had all at once broken out: he had
associated with the most horrible people, and rushed into the most
senseless debauchery. He remembered later the scandal over a boy, whom
he had taken from the country to bring up, and, in a fit of rage, had so
violently beaten that proceedings were brought against him for
unlawfully wounding. Then he recalled the scandal with a sharper, to
whom he had lost money, and given a promissory note, and against whom he
had himself lodged a complaint, asserting that he had cheated him. (This
was the money Sergey Ivanovitch had paid.) Then he remembered how he had
spent a night in the lockup for disorderly conduct in the street. He
remembered the shameful proceedings he had tried to get up against his
brother Sergey Ivanovitch, accusing him of not having paid him his share
of his mother’s fortune, and the last scandal, when he had gone to a
western province in an official capacity, and there had got into trouble
for assaulting a village elder.... It was all horribly disgusting, yet
to Levin it appeared not at all in the same disgusting light as it
inevitably would to those who did not know Nikolay, did not know all his
story, did not know his heart.

Levin remembered that when Nikolay had been in the devout stage, the
period of fasts and monks and church services, when he was seeking in
religion a support and a curb for his passionate temperament, everyone,
far from encouraging him, had jeered at him, and he, too, with the
others. They had teased him, called him Noah and Monk; and, when he had
broken out, no one had helped him, but everyone had turned away from him
with horror and disgust.

Levin felt that, in spite of all the ugliness of his life, his brother
Nikolay, in his soul, in the very depths of his soul, was no more in the
wrong than the people who despised him. He was not to blame for having
been born with his unbridled temperament and his somehow limited
intelligence. But he had always wanted to be good. "I will tell him
everything, without reserve, and I will make him speak without reserve,
too, and I’ll show him that I love him, and so understand him," Levin
resolved to himself, as, towards eleven o’clock, he reached the hotel of
which he had the address.

"At the top, 12 and 13," the porter answered Levin’s inquiry.

The door of No. 12 was half open, and there came out into the streak of
light thick fumes of cheap, poor tobacco, and the sound of a voice,
unknown to Levin; but he knew at once that his brother was there; he
heard his cough.

Konstantin Levin looked in at the door, and saw that the speaker was a
young man with an immense shock of hair, wearing a Russian jerkin, and
that a pockmarked woman in a woolen gown, without collar or cuffs, was
sitting on the sofa. His brother was not to be seen. Konstantin felt a
sharp pang at his heart at the thought of the strange company in which
his brother spent his life. No one had heard him, and Konstantin, taking
off his galoshes, listened to what the gentleman in the jerkin was
saying. He was speaking of some enterprise.

"Whom do you want?" said the voice of Nikolay Levin, angrily.

"It’s I," answered Konstantin Levin, coming forward into the light.

"Who’s _I_?" Nikolay’s voice said again, still more angrily. He could be
heard getting up hurriedly, stumbling against something, and Levin saw,
facing him in the doorway, the big, scared eyes, and the huge, thin,
stooping figure of his brother, so familiar, and yet astonishing in its
weirdness and sickliness.

He was even thinner than three years before, when Konstantin Levin had
seen him last. He was wearing a short coat, and his hands and big bones
seemed huger than ever. His hair had grown thinner, the same straight
mustaches hid his lips, the same eyes gazed strangely and naively at his
visitor.

He was not at all the same as Konstantin had been fancying him. The
worst and most tiresome part of his character, what made all relations
with him so difficult, had been forgotten by Konstantin Levin when he
thought of him, and now, when he saw his face, and especially that
nervous twitching of his head, he remembered it all.

"You’re of the Kiev university?" said Konstantin Levin to Kritsky, to
break the awkward silence that followed.

"And this woman," Nikolay Levin interrupted him, pointing to her, "is
the partner of my life, Marya Nikolaevna. I took her out of a bad
house," and he jerked his neck saying this; "but I love her and respect
her, and any one who wants to know me," he added, raising his voice and
knitting his brows, "I beg to love her and respect her. She’s just the
same as my wife, just the same. So now you know whom you’ve to do with.
And if you think you’re lowering yourself, well, here’s the floor,
there’s the door."

"So you see," pursued Nikolay Levin, painfully wrinkling his forehead
and twitching.

Konstantin scarcely heard him. He looked into his sickly, consumptive
face, and he was more and more sorry for him, and he could not force
himself to listen to what his brother was telling him about the
association. He saw that this association was a mere anchor to save him
from self-contempt. Nikolay Levin went on talking:

"Where is the association to be?" asked Konstantin Levin.

"Why? Because the peasants are just as much slaves as they ever were,
and that’s why you and Sergey Ivanovitch don’t like people to try and
get them out of their slavery," said Nikolay Levin, exasperated by the
objection.

Konstantin Levin sighed, looking meanwhile about the cheerless and dirty
room. This sigh seemed to exasperate Nikolay still more.

"No; and what do you talk of Sergey Ivanovitch for?" said Levin,
smiling.

"Sergey Ivanovitch? I’ll tell you what for!" Nikolay Levin shrieked
suddenly at the name of Sergey Ivanovitch. "I’ll tell you what for....
But what’s the use of talking? There’s only one thing.... What did you
come to me for? You look down on this, and you’re welcome to,—and go
away, in God’s name go away!" he shrieked, getting up from his chair.
"And go away, and go away!"

"I don’t look down on it at all," said Konstantin Levin timidly. "I
don’t even dispute it."

At that instant Marya Nikolaevna came back. Nikolay Levin looked round
angrily at her. She went quickly to him, and whispered something.

"I’m not well; I’ve grown irritable," said Nikolay Levin, getting calmer
and breathing painfully; "and then you talk to me of Sergey Ivanovitch
and his article. It’s such rubbish, such lying, such self-deception.
What can a man write of justice who knows nothing of it? Have you read
his article?" he asked Kritsky, sitting down again at the table, and
moving back off half of it the scattered cigarettes, so as to clear a
space.

"Why not?" said Nikolay Levin, now turning with exasperation upon
Kritsky.

Kritsky had hardly gone out when Nikolay Levin smiled and winked.

"What do you want now?" he said, and went out to him in the passage.
Left alone with Marya Nikolaevna, Levin turned to her.

"And a great deal?" whispered Levin.

"Yes," she said, looking timidly towards the doorway, where Nikolay
Levin had reappeared.

"But come to me now," said Levin. "How nicely we would arrange it!"

Konstantin Levin heard him, and the disbelief in the sense of all public
institutions, which he shared with him, and often expressed, was
distasteful to him now from his brother’s lips.

Masha promised to write to Konstantin in case of need, and to persuade
Nikolay Levin to go and stay with his brother.

In the morning Konstantin Levin left Moscow, and towards evening he
reached home. On the journey in the train he talked to his neighbors
about politics and the new railways, and, just as in Moscow, he was
overcome by a sense of confusion of ideas, dissatisfaction with himself,
shame of something or other. But when he got out at his own station,
when he saw his one-eyed coachman, Ignat, with the collar of his coat
turned up; when, in the dim light reflected by the station fires, he saw
his own sledge, his own horses with their tails tied up, in their
harness trimmed with rings and tassels; when the coachman Ignat, as he
put in his luggage, told him the village news, that the contractor had
arrived, and that Pava had calved,—he felt that little by little the
confusion was clearing up, and the shame and self-dissatisfaction were
passing away. He felt this at the mere sight of Ignat and the horses;
but when he had put on the sheepskin brought for him, had sat down
wrapped up in the sledge, and had driven off pondering on the work that
lay before him in the village, and staring at the side-horse, that had
been his saddle-horse, past his prime now, but a spirited beast from the
Don, he began to see what had happened to him in quite a different
light. He felt himself, and did not want to be any one else. All he
wanted now was to be better than before. In the first place he resolved
that from that day he would give up hoping for any extraordinary
happiness, such as marriage must have given him, and consequently he
would not so disdain what he really had. Secondly, he would never again
let himself give way to low passion, the memory of which had so tortured
him when he had been making up his mind to make an offer. Then
remembering his brother Nikolay, he resolved to himself that he would
never allow himself to forget him, that he would follow him up, and not
lose sight of him, so as to be ready to help when things should go ill
with him. And that would be soon, he felt. Then, too, his brother’s talk
of communism, which he had treated so lightly at the time, now made him
think. He considered a revolution in economic conditions nonsense. But
he always felt the injustice of his own abundance in comparison with the
poverty of the peasants, and now he determined that so as to feel quite
in the right, though he had worked hard and lived by no means
luxuriously before, he would now work still harder, and would allow
himself even less luxury. And all this seemed to him so easy a conquest
over himself that he spent the whole drive in the pleasantest daydreams.
With a resolute feeling of hope in a new, better life, he reached home
before nine o’clock at night.

The snow of the little quadrangle before the house was lit up by a light
in the bedroom windows of his old nurse, Agafea Mihalovna, who performed
the duties of housekeeper in his house. She was not yet asleep. Kouzma,
waked up by her, came sidling sleepily out onto the steps. A setter
bitch, Laska, ran out too, almost upsetting Kouzma, and whining, turned
round about Levin’s knees, jumping up and longing, but not daring, to
put her forepaws on his chest.

The bailiff came in, and said everything, thank God, was doing well; but
informed him that the buckwheat in the new drying machine had been a
little scorched. This piece of news irritated Levin. The new drying
machine had been constructed and partly invented by Levin. The bailiff
had always been against the drying machine, and now it was with
suppressed triumph that he announced that the buckwheat had been
scorched. Levin was firmly convinced that if the buckwheat had been
scorched, it was only because the precautions had not been taken, for
which he had hundreds of times given orders. He was annoyed, and
reprimanded the bailiff. But there had been an important and joyful
event: Pava, his best cow, an expensive beast, bought at a show, had
calved.

Levin went into the pen, looked Pava over, and lifted the red and
spotted calf onto her long, tottering legs. Pava, uneasy, began lowing,
but when Levin put the calf close to her she was soothed, and, sighing
heavily, began licking her with her rough tongue. The calf, fumbling,
poked her nose under her mother’s udder, and stiffened her tail out
straight.

"Here, bring the light, Fyodor, this way," said Levin, examining the
calf. "Like the mother! though the color takes after the father; but
that’s nothing. Very good. Long and broad in the haunch. Vassily
Fedorovitch, isn’t she splendid?" he said to the bailiff, quite
forgiving him for the buckwheat under the influence of his delight in
the calf.

This question was enough to take Levin back to all the details of his
work on the estate, which was on a large scale, and complicated. He went
straight from the cowhouse to the counting house, and after a little
conversation with the bailiff and Semyon the contractor, he went back to
the house and straight upstairs to the drawing room.

The house was big and old-fashioned, and Levin, though he lived alone,
had the whole house heated and used. He knew that this was stupid, he
knew that it was positively not right, and contrary to his present new
plans, but this house was a whole world to Levin. It was the world in
which his father and mother had lived and died. They had lived just the
life that to Levin seemed the ideal of perfection, and that he had
dreamed of beginning with his wife, his family.

Levin scarcely remembered his mother. His conception of her was for him
a sacred memory, and his future wife was bound to be in his imagination
a repetition of that exquisite, holy ideal of a woman that his mother
had been.

He was so far from conceiving of love for woman apart from marriage that
he positively pictured to himself first the family, and only secondarily
the woman who would give him a family. His ideas of marriage were,
consequently, quite unlike those of the great majority of his
acquaintances, for whom getting married was one of the numerous facts of
social life. For Levin it was the chief affair of life, on which its
whole happiness turned. And now he had to give up that.

He heard Agafea Mihalovna talking of how Prohor had forgotten his duty
to God, and with the money Levin had given him to buy a horse, had been
drinking without stopping, and had beaten his wife till he’d half killed
her. He listened, and read his book, and recalled the whole train of
ideas suggested by his reading. It was Tyndall’s _Treatise on Heat_. He
recalled his own criticisms of Tyndall of his complacent satisfaction in
the cleverness of his experiments, and for his lack of philosophic
insight. And suddenly there floated into his mind the joyful thought:
"In two years’ time I shall have two Dutch cows; Pava herself will
perhaps still be alive, a dozen young daughters of Berkoot and the three
others—how lovely!"

Levin looked intently at her, surprised at how well she knew his
thought.

Laska kept poking her head under his hand. He stroked her, and she
promptly curled up at his feet, laying her head on a hindpaw. And in
token of all now being well and satisfactory, she opened her mouth a
little, smacked her lips, and settling her sticky lips more comfortably
about her old teeth, she sank into blissful repose. Levin watched all
her movements attentively.

"I’d been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma: did you
know that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when he was here the last
time? He told Stiva so."

"Yes, but suppose she has refused Levin, and she wouldn’t have refused
him if it hadn’t been for the other, I know. And then, he has deceived
her so horribly."

"Yes, I don’t say so either.... Only one thing. Tell me the truth," said
Darya Alexandrovna, taking her by the hand: "tell me, did Levin speak to
you?..."

The mention of Levin’s name seemed to deprive Kitty of the last vestige
of self-control. She leaped up from her chair, and flinging her clasp on
the ground, she gesticulated rapidly with her hands and said:

"Why bring Levin in too? I can’t understand what you want to torment me
for. I’ve told you, and I say it again, that I have some pride, and
never, _never_ would I do as you’re doing—go back to a man who’s
deceived you, who has cared for another woman. I can’t understand it!
You may, but I can’t!"

As though tears were the indispensable oil, without which the machinery
of mutual confidence could not run smoothly between the two sisters, the
sisters after their tears talked, not of what was uppermost in their
minds, but, though they talked of outside matters, they understood each
other. Kitty knew that the words she had uttered in anger about her
husband’s infidelity and her humiliating position had cut her poor
sister to the heart, but that she had forgiven her. Dolly for her part
knew all she had wanted to find out. She felt certain that her surmises
were correct; that Kitty’s misery, her inconsolable misery, was due
precisely to the fact that Levin had made her an offer and she had
refused him, and Vronsky had deceived her, and that she was fully
prepared to love Levin and to detest Vronsky. Kitty said not a word of
that; she talked of nothing but her spiritual condition.

In the early days after his return from Moscow, whenever Levin shuddered
and grew red, remembering the disgrace of his rejection, he said to
himself: "This was just how I used to shudder and blush, thinking myself
utterly lost, when I was plucked in physics and did not get my remove;
and how I thought myself utterly ruined after I had mismanaged that
affair of my sister’s that was entrusted to me. And yet, now that years
have passed, I recall it and wonder that it could distress me so much.
It will be the same thing too with this trouble. Time will go by and I
shall not mind about this either."

Meanwhile spring came on, beautiful and kindly, without the delays and
treacheries of spring,—one of those rare springs in which plants,
beasts, and man rejoice alike. This lovely spring roused Levin still
more, and strengthened him in his resolution of renouncing all his past
and building up his lonely life firmly and independently. Though many of
the plans with which he had returned to the country had not been carried
out, still his most important resolution—that of purity—had been kept by
him. He was free from that shame, which had usually harassed him after a
fall; and he could look everyone straight in the face. In February he
had received a letter from Marya Nikolaevna telling him that his brother
Nikolay’s health was getting worse, but that he would not take advice,
and in consequence of this letter Levin went to Moscow to his brother’s
and succeeded in persuading him to see a doctor and to go to a
watering-place abroad. He succeeded so well in persuading his brother,
and in lending him money for the journey without irritating him, that he
was satisfied with himself in that matter. In addition to his farming,
which called for special attention in spring, and in addition to
reading, Levin had begun that winter a work on agriculture, the plan of
which turned on taking into account the character of the laborer on the
land as one of the unalterable data of the question, like the climate
and the soil, and consequently deducing all the principles of scientific
culture, not simply from the data of soil and climate, but from the data
of soil, climate, and a certain unalterable character of the laborer.
Thus, in spite of his solitude, or in consequence of his solitude, his
life was exceedingly full. Only rarely he suffered from an unsatisfied
desire to communicate his stray ideas to someone besides Agafea
Mihalovna. With her indeed he not infrequently fell into discussion upon
physics, the theory of agriculture, and especially philosophy;
philosophy was Agafea Mihalovna’s favorite subject.

Levin put on his big boots, and, for the first time, a cloth jacket,
instead of his fur cloak, and went out to look after his farm, stepping
over streams of water that flashed in the sunshine and dazzled his eyes,
and treading one minute on ice and the next into sticky mud.

Spring is the time of plans and projects. And, as he came out into the
farmyard, Levin, like a tree in spring that knows not what form will be
taken by the young shoots and twigs imprisoned in its swelling buds,
hardly knew what undertakings he was going to begin upon now in the farm
work that was so dear to him. But he felt that he was full of the most
splendid plans and projects. First of all he went to the cattle. The
cows had been let out into their paddock, and their smooth sides were
already shining with their new, sleek, spring coats; they basked in the
sunshine and lowed to go to the meadow. Levin gazed admiringly at the
cows he knew so intimately to the minutest detail of their condition,
and gave orders for them to be driven out into the meadow, and the
calves to be let into the paddock. The herdsman ran gaily to get ready
for the meadow. The cowherd girls, picking up their petticoats, ran
splashing through the mud with bare legs, still white, not yet brown
from the sun, waving brush wood in their hands, chasing the calves that
frolicked in the mirth of spring.

After admiring the young ones of that year, who were particularly
fine—the early calves were the size of a peasant’s cow, and Pava’s
daughter, at three months old, was as big as a yearling—Levin gave
orders for a trough to be brought out and for them to be fed in the
paddock. But it appeared that as the paddock had not been used during
the winter, the hurdles made in the autumn for it were broken. He sent
for the carpenter, who, according to his orders, ought to have been at
work at the thrashing machine. But it appeared that the carpenter was
repairing the harrows, which ought to have been repaired before Lent.
This was very annoying to Levin. It was annoying to come upon that
everlasting slovenliness in the farm work against which he had been
striving with all his might for so many years. The hurdles, as he
ascertained, being not wanted in winter, had been carried to the
cart-horses’ stable; and there broken, as they were of light
construction, only meant for feeding calves. Moreover, it was apparent
also that the harrows and all the agricultural implements, which he had
directed to be looked over and repaired in the winter, for which very
purpose he had hired three carpenters, had not been put into repair, and
the harrows were being repaired when they ought to have been harrowing
the field. Levin sent for his bailiff, but immediately went off himself
to look for him. The bailiff, beaming all over, like everyone that day,
in a sheepskin bordered with astrachan, came out of the barn, twisting a
bit of straw in his hands.

"It’s not those peasants but this bailiff!" said Levin, getting angry.
"Why, what do I keep you for?" he cried. But, bethinking himself that
this would not help matters, he stopped short in the middle of a
sentence, and merely sighed. "Well, what do you say? Can sowing begin?"
he asked, after a pause.

"Why not sow all?" cried Levin.

That they were only sowing the clover on fifteen acres, not on all the
forty-five, was still more annoying to him. Clover, as he knew, both
from books and from his own experience, never did well except when it
was sown as early as possible, almost in the snow. And yet Levin could
never get this done.

Levin knew very well that "a touch of mildew" meant that his English
seed oats were already ruined. Again they had not done as he had
ordered.

Levin waved his hand angrily, went into the granary to glance at the
oats, and then to the stable. The oats were not yet spoiled. But the
peasants were carrying the oats in spades when they might simply let
them slide down into the lower granary; and arranging for this to be
done, and taking two workmen from there for sowing clover, Levin got
over his vexation with the bailiff. Indeed, it was such a lovely day
that one could not be angry.

While they were saddling his horse, Levin again called up the bailiff,
who was hanging about in sight, to make it up with him, and began
talking to him about the spring operations before them, and his plans
for the farm.

The wagons were to begin carting manure earlier, so as to get all done
before the early mowing. And the ploughing of the further land to go on
without a break so as to let it ripen lying fallow. And the mowing to be
all done by hired labor, not on half-profits. The bailiff listened
attentively, and obviously made an effort to approve of his employer’s
projects. But still he had that look Levin knew so well that always
irritated him, a look of hopelessness and despondency. That look said:
"That’s all very well, but as God wills."

Nothing mortified Levin so much as that tone. But it was the tone common
to all the bailiffs he had ever had. They had all taken up that attitude
to his plans, and so now he was not angered by it, but mortified, and
felt all the more roused to struggle against this, as it seemed,
elemental force continually ranged against him, for which he could find
no other expression than "as God wills."

Levin was silent. Again he was brought face to face with that opposing
force. He knew that however much they tried, they could not hire more
than forty—thirty-seven perhaps or thirty-eight—laborers for a
reasonable sum. Some forty had been taken on, and there were no more.
But still he could not help struggling against it.

"We’ll get some more. I know, of course," Levin added laughing, "you
always want to do with as little and as poor quality as possible; but
this year I’m not going to let you have things your own way. I’ll see to
everything myself."

And Levin rode through the slush of the farmyard to the gate and out
into the open country, his good little horse, after his long inactivity,
stepping out gallantly, snorting over the pools, and asking, as it were,
for guidance. If Levin had felt happy before in the cattle pens and
farmyard, he felt happier yet in the open country. Swaying rhythmically
with the ambling paces of his good little cob, drinking in the warm yet
fresh scent of the snow and the air, as he rode through his forest over
the crumbling, wasted snow, still left in parts, and covered with
dissolving tracks, he rejoiced over every tree, with the moss reviving
on its bark and the buds swelling on its shoots. When he came out of the
forest, in the immense plain before him, his grass fields stretched in
an unbroken carpet of green, without one bare place or swamp, only
spotted here and there in the hollows with patches of melting snow. He
was not put out of temper even by the sight of the peasants’ horses and
colts trampling down his young grass (he told a peasant he met to drive
them out), nor by the sarcastic and stupid reply of the peasant Ipat,
whom he met on the way, and asked, "Well, Ipat, shall we soon be
sowing?" "We must get the ploughing done first, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch," answered Ipat. The further he rode, the happier he
became, and plans for the land rose to his mind each better than the
last; to plant all his fields with hedges along the southern borders, so
that the snow should not lie under them; to divide them up into six
fields of arable and three of pasture and hay; to build a cattle yard at
the further end of the estate, and to dig a pond and to construct
movable pens for the cattle as a means of manuring the land. And then
eight hundred acres of wheat, three hundred of potatoes, and four
hundred of clover, and not one acre exhausted.

Absorbed in such dreams, carefully keeping his horse by the hedges, so
as not to trample his young crops, he rode up to the laborers who had
been sent to sow clover. A cart with the seed in it was standing, not at
the edge, but in the middle of the crop, and the winter corn had been
torn up by the wheels and trampled by the horse. Both the laborers were
sitting in the hedge, probably smoking a pipe together. The earth in the
cart, with which the seed was mixed, was not crushed to powder, but
crusted together or adhering in clods. Seeing the master, the laborer,
Vassily, went towards the cart, while Mishka set to work sowing. This
was not as it should be, but with the laborers Levin seldom lost his
temper. When Vassily came up, Levin told him to lead the horse to the
hedge.

"Please don’t argue," said Levin, "but do as you’re told."

"Why is it you have earth that’s not sifted?" said Levin.

Levin had more than once already tried a way he knew for stifling his
anger, and turning all that seemed dark right again, and he tried that
way now. He watched how Mishka strode along, swinging the huge clods of
earth that clung to each foot; and getting off his horse, he took the
sieve from Vassily and started sowing himself.

Vassily pointed to the mark with his foot, and Levin went forward as
best he could, scattering the seed on the land. Walking was as difficult
as on a bog, and by the time Levin had ended the row he was in a great
heat, and he stopped and gave up the sieve to Vassily.

"Eh?" said Levin cheerily, already feeling the effect of his method.

"Well, mind you crumble up the clods," said Levin, going towards his
horse, "and keep an eye on Mishka. And if there’s a good crop you shall
have half a rouble for every acre."

Levin got on his horse and rode towards the field where was last year’s
clover, and the one which was ploughed ready for the spring corn.

The crop of clover coming up in the stubble was magnificent. It had
survived everything, and stood up vividly green through the broken
stalks of last year’s wheat. The horse sank in up to the pasterns, and
he drew each hoof with a sucking sound out of the half-thawed ground.
Over the ploughland riding was utterly impossible; the horse could only
keep a foothold where there was ice, and in the thawing furrows he sank
deep in at each step. The ploughland was in splendid condition; in a
couple of days it would be fit for harrowing and sowing. Everything was
capital, everything was cheering. Levin rode back across the streams,
hoping the water would have gone down. And he did in fact get across,
and startled two ducks. "There must be snipe too," he thought, and just
as he reached the turning homewards he met the forest keeper, who
confirmed his theory about the snipe.

Levin went home at a trot, so as to have time to eat his dinner and get
his gun ready for the evening.

As he rode up to the house in the happiest frame of mind, Levin heard
the bell ring at the side of the principal entrance of the house.

"Ah," cried Levin joyfully, flinging up both his hands. "Here’s a
delightful visitor! Ah, how glad I am to see you!" he shouted,
recognizing Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Well, I’m very, very glad to see you," said Levin, with a genuine smile
of childlike delight.

Levin led his friend to the room set apart for visitors, where Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s things were carried also—a bag, a gun in a case, a
satchel for cigars. Leaving him there to wash and change his clothes,
Levin went off to the counting house to speak about the ploughing and
clover. Agafea Mihalovna, always very anxious for the credit of the
house, met him in the hall with inquiries about dinner.

Stepan Arkadyevitch told him many interesting pieces of news; especially
interesting to Levin was the news that his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch,
was intending to pay him a visit in the summer.

Not one word did Stepan Arkadyevitch say in reference to Kitty and the
Shtcherbatskys; he merely gave him greetings from his wife. Levin was
grateful to him for his delicacy and was very glad of his visitor. As
always happened with him during his solitude, a mass of ideas and
feelings had been accumulating within him, which he could not
communicate to those about him. And now he poured out upon Stepan
Arkadyevitch his poetic joy in the spring, and his failures and plans
for the land, and his thoughts and criticisms on the books he had been
reading, and the idea of his own book, the basis of which really was,
though he was unaware of it himself, a criticism of all the old books on
agriculture. Stepan Arkadyevitch, always charming, understanding
everything at the slightest reference, was particularly charming on this
visit, and Levin noticed in him a special tenderness, as it were, and a
new tone of respect that flattered him.

The efforts of Agafea Mihalovna and the cook, that the dinner should be
particularly good, only ended in the two famished friends attacking the
preliminary course, eating a great deal of bread and butter, salt goose
and salted mushrooms, and in Levin’s finally ordering the soup to be
served without the accompaniment of little pies, with which the cook had
particularly meant to impress their visitor. But though Stepan
Arkadyevitch was accustomed to very different dinners, he thought
everything excellent: the herb brandy, and the bread, and the butter,
and above all the salt goose and the mushrooms, and the nettle soup, and
the chicken in white sauce, and the white Crimean wine—everything was
superb and delicious.

Levin looked out of the window at the sun sinking behind the bare
tree-tops of the forest.

"Yes, it’s wonderfully funny the way he talks. She knows where her
master’s going!" he added, patting Laska, who hung about Levin, whining
and licking his hands, his boots, and his gun.

"Why, who prevents you?" said Levin, smiling.

"Perhaps because I rejoice in what I have, and don’t fret for what I
haven’t," said Levin, thinking of Kitty.

Levin was grateful to Oblonsky for noticing, with his never-failing
tact, that he dreaded conversation about the Shtcherbatskys, and so
saying nothing about them. But now Levin was longing to find out what
was tormenting him so, yet he had not the courage to begin.

"Come, tell me how things are going with you," said Levin, bethinking
himself that it was not nice of him to think only of himself.

"You don’t admit, I know, that one can be fond of new rolls when one has
had one’s rations of bread—to your mind it’s a crime; but I don’t count
life as life without love," he said, taking Levin’s question his own
way. "What am I to do? I’m made that way. And really, one does so little
harm to anyone, and gives oneself so much pleasure..."

"What! is there something new, then?" queried Levin.

Levin listened in silence, and in spite of all the efforts he made, he
could not in the least enter into the feelings of his friend and
understand his sentiments and the charm of studying such women.

The place fixed on for the stand-shooting was not far above a stream in
a little aspen copse. On reaching the copse, Levin got out of the trap
and led Oblonsky to a corner of a mossy, swampy glade, already quite
free from snow. He went back himself to a double birch tree on the other
side, and leaning his gun on the fork of a dead lower branch, he took
off his full overcoat, fastened his belt again, and worked his arms to
see if they were free.

"Imagine! One can hear and see the grass growing!" Levin said to
himself, noticing a wet, slate-colored aspen leaf moving beside a blade
of young grass. He stood, listened, and gazed sometimes down at the wet
mossy ground, sometimes at Laska listening all alert, sometimes at the
sea of bare tree tops that stretched on the slope below him, sometimes
at the darkening sky, covered with white streaks of cloud.

"Yes, I hear it," answered Levin, reluctantly breaking the stillness
with his voice, which sounded disagreeable to himself. "Now it’s
coming!"

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s figure again went behind the bush, and Levin saw
nothing but the bright flash of a match, followed by the red glow and
blue smoke of a cigarette.

"What’s that cry?" asked Oblonsky, drawing Levin’s attention to a
prolonged cry, as though a colt were whinnying in a high voice, in play.

"Oh, don’t you know it? That’s the hare. But enough talking! Listen,
it’s flying!" almost shrieked Levin, cocking his gun.

Levin looked about him to right and to left, and there, just facing him
against the dusky blue sky above the confused mass of tender shoots of
the aspens, he saw the flying bird. It was flying straight towards him;
the guttural cry, like the even tearing of some strong stuff, sounded
close to his ear; the long beak and neck of the bird could be seen, and
at the very instant when Levin was taking aim, behind the bush where
Oblonsky stood, there was a flash of red lightning: the bird dropped
like an arrow, and darted upwards again. Again came the red flash and
the sound of a blow, and fluttering its wings as though trying to keep
up in the air, the bird halted, stopped still an instant, and fell with
a heavy splash on the slushy ground.

"Here it is!" said Levin, pointing to Laska, who with one ear raised,
wagging the end of her shaggy tail, came slowly back as though she would
prolong the pleasure, and as it were smiling, brought the dead bird to
her master. "Well, I’m glad you were successful," said Levin, who, at
the same time, had a sense of envy that he had not succeeded in shooting
the snipe.

The stand-shooting was capital. Stepan Arkadyevitch shot two more birds
and Levin two, of which one was not found. It began to get dark. Venus,
bright and silvery, shone with her soft light low down in the west
behind the birch trees, and high up in the east twinkled the red lights
of Arcturus. Over his head Levin made out the stars of the Great Bear
and lost them again. The snipe had ceased flying; but Levin resolved to
stay a little longer, till Venus, which he saw below a branch of birch,
should be above it, and the stars of the Great Bear should be perfectly
plain. Venus had risen above the branch, and the ear of the Great Bear
with its shaft was now all plainly visible against the dark blue sky,
yet still he waited.

"Let’s stay a little while," answered Levin.

"Stiva!" said Levin unexpectedly; "how is it you don’t tell me whether
your sister-in-law’s married yet, or when she’s going to be?"

Levin felt so resolute and serene that no answer, he fancied, could
affect him. But he had never dreamed of what Stepan Arkadyevitch
replied.

"What!" cried Levin. "Very ill? What is wrong with her? How has she...?"

"Splendid! Together!" cried Levin, and he ran with Laska into the
thicket to look for the snipe.

On the way home Levin asked all details of Kitty’s illness and the
Shtcherbatskys’ plans, and though he would have been ashamed to admit
it, he was pleased at what he heard. He was pleased that there was still
hope, and still more pleased that she should be suffering who had made
him suffer so much. But when Stepan Arkadyevitch began to speak of the
causes of Kitty’s illness, and mentioned Vronsky’s name, Levin cut him
short.

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled hardly perceptibly, catching the
instantaneous change he knew so well in Levin’s face, which had become
as gloomy as it had been bright a minute before.

"Have you quite settled about the forest with Ryabinin?" asked Levin.

"Then you’ve as good as given away your forest for nothing," said Levin
gloomily.

"How do you mean for nothing?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a
good-humored smile, knowing that nothing would be right in Levin’s eyes
now.

"Because the forest is worth at least a hundred and fifty roubles the
acre," answered Levin.

"Oh, these farmers!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch playfully. "Your tone of
contempt for us poor townsfolk!... But when it comes to business, we do
it better than anyone. I assure you I have reckoned it all out," he
said, "and the forest is fetching a very good price—so much so that I’m
afraid of this fellow’s crying off, in fact. You know it’s not
‘timber,’" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, hoping by this distinction to
convince Levin completely of the unfairness of his doubts. "And it won’t
run to more than twenty-five yards of fagots per acre, and he’s giving
me at the rate of seventy roubles the acre."

Levin smiled contemptuously. "I know," he thought, "that fashion not
only in him, but in all city people, who, after being twice in ten years
in the country, pick up two or three phrases and use them in season and
out of season, firmly persuaded that they know all about it. ‘_Timber,
run to so many yards the acre._’ He says those words without
understanding them himself."

"Not the least," said Levin gloomily, as they drove up to the house.

"I did not venture to disregard your excellency’s commands, though the
road was extremely bad. I positively walked the whole way, but I am here
at my time. Konstantin Dmitrievitch, my respects"; he turned to Levin,
trying to seize his hand too. But Levin, scowling, made as though he did
not notice his hand, and took out the snipe. "Your honors have been
diverting yourselves with the chase? What kind of bird may it be, pray?"
added Ryabinin, looking contemptuously at the snipe: "a great delicacy,
I suppose." And he shook his head disapprovingly, as though he had grave
doubts whether this game were worth the candle.

"Would you like to go into my study?" Levin said in French to Stepan
Arkadyevitch, scowling morosely. "Go into my study; you can talk there."

Levin, who had meanwhile been putting his gun away in the cupboard, was
just going out of the door, but catching the merchant’s words, he
stopped.

Ryabinin got up, and in silence, with a smile, he looked Levin down and
up.

"But is the thing settled between you or not? If it’s settled, it’s
useless haggling; but if it’s not," said Levin, "I’ll buy the forest."

"I wouldn’t be in a hurry if I were you," said Levin.

Levin went out of the room, slamming the door. Ryabinin looked towards
the door and shook his head with a smile.

Stepan Arkadyevitch went upstairs with his pocket bulging with notes,
which the merchant had paid him for three months in advance. The
business of the forest was over, the money in his pocket; their shooting
had been excellent, and Stepan Arkadyevitch was in the happiest frame of
mind, and so he felt specially anxious to dissipate the ill-humor that
had come upon Levin. He wanted to finish the day at supper as pleasantly
as it had been begun.

Levin certainly was out of humor, and in spite of all his desire to be
affectionate and cordial to his charming visitor, he could not control
his mood. The intoxication of the news that Kitty was not married had
gradually begun to work upon him.

Kitty was not married, but ill, and ill from love for a man who had
slighted her. This slight, as it were, rebounded upon him. Vronsky had
slighted her, and she had slighted him, Levin. Consequently Vronsky had
the right to despise Levin, and therefore he was his enemy. But all this
Levin did not think out. He vaguely felt that there was something in it
insulting to him, and he was not angry now at what had disturbed him,
but he fell foul of everything that presented itself. The stupid sale of
the forest, the fraud practiced upon Oblonsky and concluded in his
house, exasperated him.

"Really, I have never considered what I am. I am Konstantin Levin, and
nothing else."

"And Konstantin Levin very much out of temper," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling.

Though Levin tried to control himself, he was gloomy and silent. He
wanted to put one question to Stepan Arkadyevitch, but he could not
bring himself to the point, and could not find the words or the moment
in which to put it. Stepan Arkadyevitch had gone down to his room,
undressed, again washed, and attired in a nightshirt with goffered
frills, he had got into bed, but Levin still lingered in his room,
talking of various trifling matters, and not daring to ask what he
wanted to know.

"Yes, the electric light," said Levin. "Yes. Oh, and where’s Vronsky
now?" he asked suddenly, laying down the soap.

"Does he know, or doesn’t he, that I did make an offer?" Levin wondered,
gazing at him. "Yes, there’s something humbugging, diplomatic in his
face," and feeling he was blushing, he looked Stepan Arkadyevitch
straight in the face without speaking.

Levin scowled. The humiliation of his rejection stung him to the heart,
as though it were a fresh wound he had only just received. But he was at
home, and the walls of home are a support.

"Well, but whom are you attacking? I agree with you," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, sincerely and genially; though he was aware that in the
class of those who could be bought for twopence halfpenny Levin was
reckoning him too. Levin’s warmth gave him genuine pleasure. "Whom are
you attacking? Though a good deal is not true that you say about
Vronsky, but I won’t talk about that. I tell you straight out, if I were
you, I should go back with me to Moscow, and..."

"But we won’t talk about it. Please forgive me, if I’ve been nasty,"
said Levin. Now that he had opened his heart, he became as he had been
in the morning. "You’re not angry with me, Stiva? Please don’t be
angry," he said, and smiling, he took his hand.

Soon after the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there appeared in the
morning crowd at the springs two persons who attracted universal and
unfavorable attention. These were a tall man with a stooping figure, and
huge hands, in an old coat too short for him, with black, simple, and
yet terrible eyes, and a pockmarked, kind-looking woman, very badly and
tastelessly dressed. Recognizing these persons as Russians, Kitty had
already in her imagination begun constructing a delightful and touching
romance about them. But the princess, having ascertained from the
visitors’ list that this was Nikolay Levin and Marya Nikolaevna,
explained to Kitty what a bad man this Levin was, and all her fancies
about these two people vanished. Not so much from what her mother told
her, as from the fact that it was Konstantin’s brother, this pair
suddenly seemed to Kitty intensely unpleasant. This Levin, with his
continual twitching of his head, aroused in her now an irrepressible
feeling of disgust.

Kitty was walking there with her mother and the Moscow colonel, smart
and jaunty in his European coat, bought ready-made at Frankfort. They
were walking on one side of the arcade, trying to avoid Levin, who was
walking on the other side. Varenka, in her dark dress, in a black hat
with a turn-down brim, was walking up and down the whole length of the
arcade with a blind Frenchwoman, and, every time she met Kitty, they
exchanged friendly glances.

"It’s so funny to see your _engouements_," said the princess. "No, we’d
better go back," she added, noticing Levin coming towards them with his
companion and a German doctor, to whom he was talking very noisily and
angrily.

They turned to go back, when suddenly they heard, not noisy talk, but
shouting. Levin, stopping short, was shouting at the doctor, and the
doctor, too, was excited. A crowd gathered about them. The princess and
Kitty beat a hasty retreat, while the colonel joined the crowd to find
out what was the matter.

The next day, as she watched her unknown friend, Kitty noticed that
Mademoiselle Varenka was already on the same terms with Levin and his
companion as with her other _protégés_. She went up to them, entered
into conversation with them, and served as interpreter for the woman,
who could not speak any foreign language.

"Why, you saved that Levin from disagreeable consequences."

"Well, and what’s this Levin going to do?" asked the princess.

Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev wanted a rest from mental work, and instead
of going abroad as he usually did, he came towards the end of May to
stay in the country with his brother. In his judgment the best sort of
life was a country life. He had come now to enjoy such a life at his
brother’s. Konstantin Levin was very glad to have him, especially as he
did not expect his brother Nikolay that summer. But in spite of his
affection and respect for Sergey Ivanovitch, Konstantin Levin was
uncomfortable with his brother in the country. It made him
uncomfortable, and it positively annoyed him to see his brother’s
attitude to the country. To Konstantin Levin the country was the
background of life, that is of pleasures, endeavors, labor. To Sergey
Ivanovitch the country meant on one hand rest from work, on the other a
valuable antidote to the corrupt influences of town, which he took with
satisfaction and a sense of its utility. To Konstantin Levin the country
was good first because it afforded a field for labor, of the usefulness
of which there could be no doubt. To Sergey Ivanovitch the country was
particularly good, because there it was possible and fitting to do
nothing. Moreover, Sergey Ivanovitch’s attitude to the peasants rather
piqued Konstantin. Sergey Ivanovitch used to say that he knew and liked
the peasantry, and he often talked to the peasants, which he knew how to
do without affectation or condescension, and from every such
conversation he would deduce general conclusions in favor of the
peasantry and in confirmation of his knowing them. Konstantin Levin did
not like such an attitude to the peasants. To Konstantin the peasant was
simply the chief partner in their common labor, and in spite of all the
respect and the love, almost like that of kinship, he had for the
peasant—sucked in probably, as he said himself, with the milk of his
peasant nurse—still as a fellow-worker with him, while sometimes
enthusiastic over the vigor, gentleness, and justice of these men, he
was very often, when their common labors called for other qualities,
exasperated with the peasant for his carelessness, lack of method,
drunkenness, and lying. If he had been asked whether he liked or didn’t
like the peasants, Konstantin Levin would have been absolutely at a loss
what to reply. He liked and did not like the peasants, just as he liked
and did not like men in general. Of course, being a good-hearted man, he
liked men rather than he disliked them, and so too with the peasants.
But like or dislike "the people" as something apart he could not, not
only because he lived with "the people," and all his interests were
bound up with theirs, but also because he regarded himself as a part of
"the people," did not see any special qualities or failings
distinguishing himself and "the people," and could not contrast himself
with them. Moreover, although he had lived so long in the closest
relations with the peasants, as farmer and arbitrator, and what was
more, as adviser (the peasants trusted him, and for thirty miles round
they would come to ask his advice), he had no definite views of "the
people," and would have been as much at a loss to answer the question
whether he knew "the people" as the question whether he liked them. For
him to say he knew the peasantry would have been the same as to say he
knew men. He was continually watching and getting to know people of all
sorts, and among them peasants, whom he regarded as good and interesting
people, and he was continually observing new points in them, altering
his former views of them and forming new ones. With Sergey Ivanovitch it
was quite the contrary. Just as he liked and praised a country life in
comparison with the life he did not like, so too he liked the peasantry
in contradistinction to the class of men he did not like, and so too he
knew the peasantry as something distinct from and opposed to men
generally. In his methodical brain there were distinctly formulated
certain aspects of peasant life, deduced partly from that life itself,
but chiefly from contrast with other modes of life. He never changed his
opinion of the peasantry and his sympathetic attitude towards them.

In the discussions that arose between the brothers on their views of the
peasantry, Sergey Ivanovitch always got the better of his brother,
precisely because Sergey Ivanovitch had definite ideas about the
peasant—his character, his qualities, and his tastes. Konstantin Levin
had no definite and unalterable idea on the subject, and so in their
arguments Konstantin was readily convicted of contradicting himself.

Konstantin Levin regarded his brother as a man of immense intellect and
culture, as generous in the highest sense of the word, and possessed of
a special faculty for working for the public good. But in the depths of
his heart, the older he became, and the more intimately he knew his
brother, the more and more frequently the thought struck him that this
faculty of working for the public good, of which he felt himself utterly
devoid, was possibly not so much a quality as a lack of something—not a
lack of good, honest, noble desires and tastes, but a lack of vital
force, of what is called heart, of that impulse which drives a man to
choose someone out of the innumerable paths of life, and to care only
for that one. The better he knew his brother, the more he noticed that
Sergey Ivanovitch, and many other people who worked for the public
welfare, were not led by an impulse of the heart to care for the public
good, but reasoned from intellectual considerations that it was a right
thing to take interest in public affairs, and consequently took interest
in them. Levin was confirmed in this generalization by observing that
his brother did not take questions affecting the public welfare or the
question of the immortality of the soul a bit more to heart than he did
chess problems, or the ingenious construction of a new machine.

Besides this, Konstantin Levin was not at his ease with his brother,
because in summer in the country Levin was continually busy with work on
the land, and the long summer day was not long enough for him to get
through all he had to do, while Sergey Ivanovitch was taking a holiday.
But though he was taking a holiday now, that is to say, he was doing no
writing, he was so used to intellectual activity that he liked to put
into concise and eloquent shape the ideas that occurred to him, and
liked to have someone to listen to him. His most usual and natural
listener was his brother. And so in spite of the friendliness and
directness of their relations, Konstantin felt an awkwardness in leaving
him alone. Sergey Ivanovitch liked to stretch himself on the grass in
the sun, and to lie so, basking and chatting lazily.

But Konstantin Levin found it dull sitting and listening to him,
especially when he knew that while he was away they would be carting
dung onto the fields not ploughed ready for it, and heaping it all up
anyhow; and would not screw the shares in the ploughs, but would let
them come off and then say that the new ploughs were a silly invention,
and there was nothing like the old Andreevna plough, and so on.

"No, I must just run round to the counting-house for a minute," Levin
would answer, and he would run off to the fields.

Konstantin Levin, whose presence was needed in the plough land and
meadows, had come to take his brother in the trap.

The brothers had to drive through the woods to reach the meadows. Sergey
Ivanovitch was all the while admiring the beauty of the woods, which
were a tangled mass of leaves, pointing out to his brother now an old
lime tree on the point of flowering, dark on the shady side, and
brightly spotted with yellow stipules, now the young shoots of this
year’s saplings brilliant with emerald. Konstantin Levin did not like
talking and hearing about the beauty of nature. Words for him took away
the beauty of what he saw. He assented to what his brother said, but he
could not help beginning to think of other things. When they came out of
the woods, all his attention was engrossed by the view of the fallow
land on the upland, in parts yellow with grass, in parts trampled and
checkered with furrows, in parts dotted with ridges of dung, and in
parts even ploughed. A string of carts was moving across it. Levin
counted the carts, and was pleased that all that were wanted had been
brought, and at the sight of the meadows his thoughts passed to the
mowing. He always felt something special moving him to the quick at the
hay-making. On reaching the meadow Levin stopped the horse.

The morning dew was still lying on the thick undergrowth of the grass,
and that he might not get his feet wet, Sergey Ivanovitch asked his
brother to drive him in the trap up to the willow tree from which the
carp was caught. Sorry as Konstantin Levin was to crush down his mowing
grass, he drove him into the meadow. The high grass softly turned about
the wheels and the horse’s legs, leaving its seeds clinging to the wet
axles and spokes of the wheels. His brother seated himself under a bush,
arranging his tackle, while Levin led the horse away, fastened him up,
and walked into the vast gray-green sea of grass unstirred by the wind.
The silky grass with its ripe seeds came almost to his waist in the
dampest spots.

Crossing the meadow, Konstantin Levin came out onto the road, and met an
old man with a swollen eye, carrying a skep on his shoulder.

Levin went up to his brother.

Sergey Ivanovitch had caught nothing, but he was not bored, and seemed
in the most cheerful frame of mind. Levin saw that, stimulated by his
conversation with the doctor, he wanted to talk. Levin, on the other
hand, would have liked to get home as soon as possible to give orders
about getting together the mowers for next day, and to set at rest his
doubts about the mowing, which greatly absorbed him.

"I don’t know the riddle," answered Levin wearily.

"Well, I did try, you know," Levin said slowly and unwillingly. "I
can’t! and so there’s no help for it."

"None of those things. I’ve tried, and I see I can do nothing," said
Levin.

"Self-respect!" said Levin, stung to the quick by his brother’s words;
"I don’t understand. If they’d told me at college that other people
understood the integral calculus, and I didn’t, then pride would have
come in. But in this case one wants first to be convinced that one has
certain qualifications for this sort of business, and especially that
all this business is of great importance."

"I don’t think it important; it does not take hold of me, I can’t help
it," answered Levin, making out that what he saw was the bailiff, and
that the bailiff seemed to be letting the peasants go off the ploughed
land. They were turning the plough over. "Can they have finished
ploughing?" he wondered.

"I never did assert it," thought Konstantin Levin.

Konstantin Levin felt that there was no course open to him but to
submit, or to confess to a lack of zeal for the public good. And this
mortified him and hurt his feelings.

Konstantin Levin felt himself morally pinned against a wall, and so he
got hot, and unconsciously blurted out the chief cause of his
indifference to public business.

"No, you can ask anyone you like," Konstantin Levin answered with
decision, "the man that can read and write is much inferior as a
workman. And mending the highroads is an impossibility; and as soon as
they put up bridges they’re stolen."

"Yes, I admit it," said Levin without thinking, and he was conscious
immediately that he had said what he did not think. He felt that if he
admitted that, it would be proved that he had been talking meaningless
rubbish. How it would be proved he could not tell, but he knew that this
would inevitably be logically proved to him, and he awaited the proofs.

"But I still do not admit this movement to be just," said Konstantin
Levin, reddening a little.

"Well, supposing that’s so," said Levin, though he did not suppose so at
all, "supposing that is so, still I don’t see, all the same, what I’m to
worry myself about it for."

"No; since we are talking, explain it to me from the philosophical point
of view," said Levin.

"I can’t see where philosophy comes in," said Sergey Ivanovitch, in a
tone, Levin fancied, as though he did not admit his brother’s right to
talk about philosophy. And that irritated Levin.

"No!" Konstantin Levin broke in with still greater heat; "the
emancipation of the serfs was a different matter. There self-interest
did come in. One longed to throw off that yoke that crushed us, all
decent people among us. But to be a town councilor and discuss how many
dustmen are needed, and how chimneys shall be constructed in the town in
which I don’t live—to serve on a jury and try a peasant who’s stolen a
flitch of bacon, and listen for six hours at a stretch to all sorts of
jabber from the counsel for the defense and the prosecution, and the
president cross-examining my old half-witted Alioshka, ‘Do you admit,
prisoner in the dock, the fact of the removal of the bacon?’ ‘Eh?’"

Konstantin Levin had warmed to his subject, and began mimicking the
president and the half-witted Alioshka: it seemed to him that it was all
to the point.

Konstantin Levin spoke as though the floodgates of his speech had burst
open. Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.

But Konstantin Levin wanted to justify himself for the failing, of which
he was conscious, of lack of zeal for the public welfare, and he went
on.

And Sergey Ivanovitch carried the subject into the regions of
philosophical history where Konstantin Levin could not follow him, and
showed him all the incorrectness of his view.

The personal matter that absorbed Levin during his conversation with his
brother was this. Once in a previous year he had gone to look at the
mowing, and being made very angry by the bailiff he had recourse to his
favorite means for regaining his temper,—he took a scythe from a peasant
and began mowing.

Towards evening Konstantin Levin went to his counting house, gave
directions as to the work to be done, and sent about the village to
summon the mowers for the morrow, to cut the hay in Kalinov meadow, the
largest and best of his grass lands.

At tea the same evening Levin said to his brother:

"Yes, it’s very pleasant," said Levin.

Next morning Konstantin Levin got up earlier than usual, but he was
detained giving directions on the farm, and when he reached the mowing
grass the mowers were already at their second row.

They were mowing slowly over the uneven, low-lying parts of the meadow,
where there had been an old dam. Levin recognized some of his own men.
Here was old Yermil in a very long white smock, bending forward to swing
a scythe; there was a young fellow, Vaska, who had been a coachman of
Levin’s, taking every row with a wide sweep. Here, too, was Tit, Levin’s
preceptor in the art of mowing, a thin little peasant. He was in front
of all, and cut his wide row without bending, as though playing with the
scythe.

Levin got off his mare, and fastening her up by the roadside went to
meet Tit, who took a second scythe out of a bush and gave it to him.

Levin took the scythe, and began trying it. As they finished their rows,
the mowers, hot and good-humored, came out into the road one after
another, and, laughing a little, greeted the master. They all stared at
him, but no one made any remark, till a tall old man, with a wrinkled,
beardless face, wearing a short sheepskin jacket, came out into the road
and accosted him.

"Look’ee now, master, once take hold of the rope there’s no letting it
go!" he said, and Levin heard smothered laughter among the mowers.

Tit made room, and Levin started behind him. The grass was short close
to the road, and Levin, who had not done any mowing for a long while,
and was disconcerted by the eyes fastened upon him, cut badly for the
first moments, though he swung his scythe vigorously. Behind him he
heard voices:

The grass became softer, and Levin, listening without answering,
followed Tit, trying to do the best he could. They moved a hundred
paces. Tit kept moving on, without stopping, not showing the slightest
weariness, but Levin was already beginning to be afraid he would not be
able to keep it up: he was so tired.

He felt as he swung his scythe that he was at the very end of his
strength, and was making up his mind to ask Tit to stop. But at that
very moment Tit stopped of his own accord, and stooping down picked up
some grass, rubbed his scythe, and began whetting it. Levin straightened
himself, and drawing a deep breath looked round. Behind him came a
peasant, and he too was evidently tired, for he stopped at once without
waiting to mow up to Levin, and began whetting his scythe. Tit sharpened
his scythe and Levin’s, and they went on. The next time it was just the
same. Tit moved on with sweep after sweep of his scythe, not stopping
nor showing signs of weariness. Levin followed him, trying not to get
left behind, and he found it harder and harder: the moment came when he
felt he had no strength left, but at that very moment Tit stopped and
whetted the scythes.

So they mowed the first row. And this long row seemed particularly hard
work to Levin; but when the end was reached and Tit, shouldering his
scythe, began with deliberate stride returning on the tracks left by his
heels in the cut grass, and Levin walked back in the same way over the
space he had cut, in spite of the sweat that ran in streams over his
face and fell in drops down his nose, and drenched his back as though he
had been soaked in water, he felt very happy. What delighted him
particularly was that now he knew he would be able to hold out.

The first row, as Levin noticed, Tit had mowed specially quickly,
probably wishing to put his master to the test, and the row happened to
be a long one. The next rows were easier, but still Levin had to strain
every nerve not to drop behind the peasants.

Suddenly, in the midst of his toil, without understanding what it was or
whence it came, he felt a pleasant sensation of chill on his hot, moist
shoulders. He glanced at the sky in the interval for whetting the
scythes. A heavy, lowering storm cloud had blown up, and big raindrops
were falling. Some of the peasants went to their coats and put them on;
others—just like Levin himself—merely shrugged their shoulders, enjoying
the pleasant coolness of it.

Another row, and yet another row, followed—long rows and short rows,
with good grass and with poor grass. Levin lost all sense of time, and
could not have told whether it was late or early now. A change began to
come over his work, which gave him immense satisfaction. In the midst of
his toil there were moments during which he forgot what he was doing,
and it came all easy to him, and at those same moments his row was
almost as smooth and well cut as Tit’s. But so soon as he recollected
what he was doing, and began trying to do better, he was at once
conscious of all the difficulty of his task, and the row was badly mown.

On finishing yet another row he would have gone back to the top of the
meadow again to begin the next, but Tit stopped, and going up to the old
man said something in a low voice to him. They both looked at the sun.
"What are they talking about, and why doesn’t he go back?" thought
Levin, not guessing that the peasants had been mowing no less than four
hours without stopping, and it was time for their lunch.

Levin gave his scythe to Tit, and together with the peasants, who were
crossing the long stretch of mown grass, slightly sprinkled with rain,
to get their bread from the heap of coats, he went towards his house.
Only then he suddenly awoke to the fact that he had been wrong about the
weather and the rain was drenching his hay.

Levin untied his horse and rode home to his coffee. Sergey Ivanovitch
was only just getting up. When he had drunk his coffee, Levin rode back
again to the mowing before Sergey Ivanovitch had had time to dress and
come down to the dining room.

After lunch Levin was not in the same place in the string of mowers as
before, but stood between the old man who had accosted him jocosely, and
now invited him to be his neighbor, and a young peasant, who had only
been married in the autumn, and who was mowing this summer for the first
time.

Behind Levin came the lad Mishka. His pretty, boyish face, with a twist
of fresh grass bound round his hair, was all working with effort; but
whenever anyone looked at him he smiled. He would clearly have died
sooner than own it was hard work for him.

Levin kept between them. In the very heat of the day the mowing did not
seem such hard work to him. The perspiration with which he was drenched
cooled him, while the sun, that burned his back, his head, and his arms,
bare to the elbow, gave a vigor and dogged energy to his labor; and more
and more often now came those moments of unconsciousness, when it was
possible not to think what one was doing. The scythe cut of itself.
These were happy moments. Still more delightful were the moments when
they reached the stream where the rows ended, and the old man rubbed his
scythe with the wet, thick grass, rinsed its blade in the fresh water of
the stream, ladled out a little in a tin dipper, and offered Levin a
drink.

And truly Levin had never drunk any liquor so good as this warm water
with green bits floating in it, and a taste of rust from the tin dipper.
And immediately after this came the delicious, slow saunter, with his
hand on the scythe, during which he could wipe away the streaming sweat,
take deep breaths of air, and look about at the long string of mowers
and at what was happening around in the forest and the country.

The longer Levin mowed, the oftener he felt the moments of
unconsciousness in which it seemed not his hands that swung the scythe,
but the scythe mowing of itself, a body full of life and consciousness
of its own, and as though by magic, without thinking of it, the work
turned out regular and well-finished of itself. These were the most
blissful moments.

It was only hard work when he had to break off the motion, which had
become unconscious, and to think; when he had to mow round a hillock or
a tuft of sorrel. The old man did this easily. When a hillock came he
changed his action, and at one time with the heel, and at another with
the tip of his scythe, clipped the hillock round both sides with short
strokes. And while he did this he kept looking about and watching what
came into his view: at one moment he picked a wild berry and ate it or
offered it to Levin, then he flung away a twig with the blade of the
scythe, then he looked at a quail’s nest, from which the bird flew just
under the scythe, or caught a snake that crossed his path, and lifting
it on the scythe as though on a fork showed it to Levin and threw it
away.

For both Levin and the young peasant behind him, such changes of
position were difficult. Both of them, repeating over and over again the
same strained movement, were in a perfect frenzy of toil, and were
incapable of shifting their position and at the same time watching what
was before them.

Levin did not notice how time was passing. If he had been asked how long
he had been working he would have said half an hour—and it was getting
on for dinner time. As they were walking back over the cut grass, the
old man called Levin’s attention to the little girls and boys who were
coming from different directions, hardly visible through the long grass,
and along the road towards the mowers, carrying sacks of bread dragging
at their little hands and pitchers of the sour rye-beer, with cloths
wrapped round them.

Levin sat down by them; he felt disinclined to go away.

The sop was so good that Levin gave up the idea of going home. He dined
with the old man, and talked to him about his family affairs, taking the
keenest interest in them, and told him about his own affairs and all the
circumstances that could be of interest to the old man. He felt much
nearer to him than to his brother, and could not help smiling at the
affection he felt for this man. When the old man got up again, said his
prayer, and lay down under a bush, putting some grass under his head for
a pillow, Levin did the same, and in spite of the clinging flies that
were so persistent in the sunshine, and the midges that tickled his hot
face and body, he fell asleep at once and only waked when the sun had
passed to the other side of the bush and reached him. The old man had
been awake a long while, and was sitting up whetting the scythes of the
younger lads.

Levin looked about him and hardly recognized the place, everything was
so changed. The immense stretch of meadow had been mown and was
sparkling with a peculiar fresh brilliance, with its lines of already
sweet-smelling grass in the slanting rays of the evening sun. And the
bushes about the river had been cut down, and the river itself, not
visible before, now gleaming like steel in its bends, and the moving,
ascending, peasants, and the sharp wall of grass of the unmown part of
the meadow, and the hawks hovering over the stripped meadow—all was
perfectly new. Raising himself, Levin began considering how much had
been cut and how much more could still be done that day.

The work done was exceptionally much for forty-two men. They had cut the
whole of the big meadow, which had, in the years of serf labor, taken
thirty scythes two days to mow. Only the corners remained to do, where
the rows were short. But Levin felt a longing to get as much mowing done
that day as possible, and was vexed with the sun sinking so quickly in
the sky. He felt no weariness; all he wanted was to get his work done
more and more quickly and as much done as possible.

Levin still kept between the young peasant and the old man. The old man,
who had put on his short sheepskin jacket, was just as good-humored,
jocose, and free in his movements. Among the trees they were continually
cutting with their scythes the so-called "birch mushrooms," swollen fat
in the succulent grass. But the old man bent down every time he came
across a mushroom, picked it up and put it in his bosom. "Another
present for my old woman," he said as he did so.

Easy as it was to mow the wet, soft grass, it was hard work going up and
down the steep sides of the ravine. But this did not trouble the old
man. Swinging his scythe just as ever, and moving his feet in their big,
plaited shoes with firm, little steps, he climbed slowly up the steep
place, and though his breeches hanging out below his smock, and his
whole frame trembled with effort, he did not miss one blade of grass or
one mushroom on his way, and kept making jokes with the peasants and
Levin. Levin walked after him and often thought he must fall, as he
climbed with a scythe up a steep cliff where it would have been hard
work to clamber without anything. But he climbed up and did what he had
to do. He felt as though some external force were moving him.

Mashkin Upland was mown, the last row finished, the peasants had put on
their coats and were gaily trudging home. Levin got on his horse and,
parting regretfully from the peasants, rode homewards. On the hillside
he looked back; he could not see them in the mist that had risen from
the valley; he could only hear rough, good-humored voices, laughter, and
the sound of clanking scythes.

Sergey Ivanovitch had long ago finished dinner, and was drinking iced
lemon and water in his own room, looking through the reviews and papers
which he had only just received by post, when Levin rushed into the
room, talking merrily, with his wet and matted hair sticking to his
forehead, and his back and chest grimed and moist.

"We mowed the whole meadow! Oh, it is nice, delicious! And how have you
been getting on?" said Levin, completely forgetting the disagreeable
conversation of the previous day.

"Rain? Why, there was scarcely a drop. I’ll come directly. So you had a
nice day too? That’s first-rate." And Levin went off to change his
clothes.

Five minutes later the brothers met in the dining room. Although it
seemed to Levin that he was not hungry, and he sat down to dinner simply
so as not to hurt Kouzma’s feelings, yet when he began to eat the dinner
struck him as extraordinarily good. Sergey Ivanovitch watched him with a
smile.

The letter was from Oblonsky. Levin read it aloud. Oblonsky wrote to him
from Petersburg: "I have had a letter from Dolly; she’s at Ergushovo,
and everything seems going wrong there. Do ride over and see her,
please; help her with advice; you know all about it. She will be so glad
to see you. She’s quite alone, poor thing. My mother-in-law and all of
them are still abroad."

"That’s capital! I will certainly ride over to her," said Levin. "Or
we’ll go together. She’s such a splendid woman, isn’t she?"

"Maybe so; but anyway it’s a pleasure such as I have never known in my
life. And there’s no harm in it, you know. Is there?" answered Levin. "I
can’t help it if they don’t like it. Though I do believe it’s all right.
Eh?"

"Eh! our conversation yesterday?" said Levin, blissfully dropping his
eyelids and drawing deep breaths after finishing his dinner, and
absolutely incapable of recalling what their conversation yesterday was
about.

Levin listened to his brother and did not understand a single word, and
did not want to understand. He was only afraid his brother might ask him
some question which would make it evident he had not heard.

"Yes, of course. But, do you know? I won’t stand up for my view,"
answered Levin, with a guilty, childlike smile. "Whatever was it I was
disputing about?" he wondered. "Of course, I’m right, and he’s right,
and it’s all first-rate. Only I must go round to the counting house and
see to things." He got up, stretching and smiling. Sergey Ivanovitch
smiled too.

"Oh, heavens!" shouted Levin, so loudly that Sergey Ivanovitch was quite
frightened.

"How’s Agafea Mihalovna’s hand?" said Levin, slapping himself on the
head. "I’d positively forgotten her even."

Stephan Arkadyevitch had gone to Petersburg to perform the most natural
and essential official duty—so familiar to everyone in the government
service, though incomprehensible to outsiders—that duty, but for which
one could hardly be in government service, of reminding the ministry of
his existence—and having, for the due performance of this rite, taken
all the available cash from home, was gaily and agreeably spending his
days at the races and in the summer villas. Meanwhile Dolly and the
children had moved into the country, to cut down expenses as much as
possible. She had gone to Ergushovo, the estate that had been her dowry,
and the one where in spring the forest had been sold. It was nearly
forty miles from Levin’s Pokrovskoe. The big, old house at Ergushovo had
been pulled down long ago, and the old prince had had the lodge done up
and built on to. Twenty years before, when Dolly was a child, the lodge
had been roomy and comfortable, though, like all lodges, it stood
sideways to the entrance avenue, and faced the south. But by now this
lodge was old and dilapidated. When Stepan Arkadyevitch had gone down in
the spring to sell the forest, Dolly had begged him to look over the
house and order what repairs might be needed. Stepan Arkadyevitch, like
all unfaithful husbands indeed, was very solicitous for his wife’s
comfort, and he had himself looked over the house, and given
instructions about everything that he considered necessary. What he
considered necessary was to cover all the furniture with cretonne, to
put up curtains, to weed the garden, to make a little bridge on the
pond, and to plant flowers. But he forgot many other essential matters,
the want of which greatly distressed Darya Alexandrovna later on.

Darya Alexandrovna peeped out in front, and was delighted when she
recognized in the gray hat and gray coat the familiar figure of Levin
walking to meet them. She was glad to see him at any time, but at this
moment she was specially glad he should see her in all her glory. No one
was better able to appreciate her grandeur than Levin.

"Yes; he writes that you are here, and that he thinks you might allow me
to be of use to you," said Levin, and as he said it he became suddenly
embarrassed, and, stopping abruptly, he walked on in silence by the
wagonette, snapping off the buds of the lime trees and nibbling them. He
was embarrassed through a sense that Darya Alexandrovna would be annoyed
by receiving from an outsider help that should by rights have come from
her own husband. Darya Alexandrovna certainly did not like this little
way of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s of foisting his domestic duties on others.
And she was at once aware that Levin was aware of this. It was just for
this fineness of perception, for this delicacy, that Darya Alexandrovna
liked Levin.

"I know, of course," said Levin, "that that simply means that you would
like to see me, and I’m exceedingly glad. Though I can fancy that, used
to town housekeeping as you are, you must feel in the wilds here, and if
there’s anything wanted, I’m altogether at your disposal."

"Oh, no!" said Dolly. "At first things were rather uncomfortable, but
now we’ve settled everything capitally—thanks to my old nurse," she
said, indicating Marya Philimonovna, who, seeing that they were speaking
of her, smiled brightly and cordially to Levin. She knew him, and knew
that he would be a good match for her young lady, and was very keen to
see the matter settled.

"No, I’ll walk. Children, who’d like to race the horses with me?" The
children knew Levin very little, and could not remember when they had
seen him, but they experienced in regard to him none of that strange
feeling of shyness and hostility which children so often experience
towards hypocritical, grown-up people, and for which they are so often
and miserably punished. Hypocrisy in anything whatever may deceive the
cleverest and most penetrating man, but the least wide-awake of children
recognizes it, and is revolted by it, however ingeniously it may be
disguised. Whatever faults Levin had, there was not a trace of hypocrisy
in him, and so the children showed him the same friendliness that they
saw in their mother’s face. On his invitation, the two elder ones at
once jumped out to him and ran with him as simply as they would have
done with their nurse or Miss Hoole or their mother. Lily, too, began
begging to go to him, and her mother handed her to him; he sat her on
his shoulder and ran along with her.

Here, in the country, with children, and with Darya Alexandrovna, with
whom he was in sympathy, Levin was in a mood not infrequent with him, of
childlike light-heartedness that she particularly liked in him. As he
ran with the children, he taught them gymnastic feats, set Miss Hoole
laughing with his queer English accent, and talked to Darya Alexandrovna
of his pursuits in the country.

And Levin, to turn the conversation, explained to Darya Alexandrovna the
theory of cow-keeping, based on the principle that the cow is simply a
machine for the transformation of food into milk, and so on.

She had by now got her household matters so satisfactorily arranged,
thanks to Marya Philimonovna, that she was disinclined to make any
change in them; besides, she had no faith in Levin’s knowledge of
farming. General principles, as to the cow being a machine for the
production of milk, she looked on with suspicion. It seemed to her that
such principles could only be a hindrance in farm management. It all
seemed to her a far simpler matter: all that was needed, as Marya
Philimonovna had explained, was to give Brindle and Whitebreast more
food and drink, and not to let the cook carry all the kitchen slops to
the laundry maid’s cow. That was clear. But general propositions as to
feeding on meal and on grass were doubtful and obscure. And, what was
most important, she wanted to talk about Kitty.

"And how is she—better?" Levin asked in agitation.

"Oh, I’m very glad!" said Levin, and Dolly fancied she saw something
touching, helpless, in his face as he said this and looked silently into
her face.

"I? I’m not angry with her," said Levin.

"You know I made an offer and that I was refused," said Levin, and all
the tenderness he had been feeling for Kitty a minute before was
replaced by a feeling of anger for the slight he had suffered.

"Perhaps so," said Levin, "but..."

The feeling that had seemed dead revived more and more, rose up and took
possession of Levin’s heart.

"Yes, to choose between me and Vronsky," thought Levin, and the dead
thing that had come to life within him died again, and only weighed on
his heart and set it aching.

Levin recalled Kitty’s answer. She had said: "_No, that cannot be_..."

"I don’t know!" said Levin, jumping up. "If you only knew how you are
hurting me. It’s just as if a child of yours were dead, and they were to
say to you: He would have been like this and like that, and he might
have lived, and how happy you would have been in him. But he’s dead,
dead, dead!..."

"How absurd you are!" said Darya Alexandrovna, looking with mournful
tenderness at Levin’s excitement. "Yes, I see it all more and more
clearly," she went on musingly. "So you won’t come to see us, then, when
Kitty’s here?"

The little girl tried to say it in French, but could not remember the
French for spade; the mother prompted her, and then told her in French
where to look for the spade. And this made a disagreeable impression on
Levin.

Levin stayed to tea; but his good-humor had vanished, and he felt ill at
ease.

After tea he went out into the hall to order his horses to be put in,
and, when he came back, he found Darya Alexandrovna greatly disturbed,
with a troubled face, and tears in her eyes. While Levin had been
outside, an incident had occurred which had utterly shattered all the
happiness she had been feeling that day, and her pride in her children.
Grisha and Tanya had been fighting over a ball. Darya Alexandrovna,
hearing a scream in the nursery, ran in and saw a terrible sight. Tanya
was pulling Grisha’s hair, while he, with a face hideous with rage, was
beating her with his fists wherever he could get at her. Something
snapped in Darya Alexandrovna’s heart when she saw this. It was as if
darkness had swooped down upon her life; she felt that these children of
hers, that she was so proud of, were not merely most ordinary, but
positively bad, ill-bred children, with coarse, brutal
propensities—wicked children.

She could not talk or think of anything else, and she could not speak to
Levin of her misery.

Levin saw she was unhappy and tried to comfort her, saying that it
showed nothing bad, that all children fight; but, even as he said it, he
was thinking in his heart: "No, I won’t be artificial and talk French
with my children; but my children won’t be like that. All one has to do
is not spoil children, not to distort their nature, and they’ll be
delightful. No, my children won’t be like that."

In the middle of July the elder of the village on Levin’s sister’s
estate, about fifteen miles from Pokrovskoe, came to Levin to report on
how things were going there and on the hay. The chief source of income
on his sister’s estate was from the riverside meadows. In former years
the hay had been bought by the peasants for twenty roubles the three
acres. When Levin took over the management of the estate, he thought on
examining the grasslands that they were worth more, and he fixed the
price at twenty-five roubles the three acres. The peasants would not
give that price, and, as Levin suspected, kept off other purchasers.
Then Levin had driven over himself, and arranged to have the grass cut,
partly by hired labor, partly at a payment of a certain proportion of
the crop. His own peasants put every hindrance they could in the way of
this new arrangement, but it was carried out, and the first year the
meadows had yielded a profit almost double. The previous year—which was
the third year—the peasants had maintained the same opposition to the
arrangement, and the hay had been cut on the same system. This year the
peasants were doing all the mowing for a third of the hay crop, and the
village elder had come now to announce that the hay had been cut, and
that, fearing rain, they had invited the counting-house clerk over, had
divided the crop in his presence, and had raked together eleven stacks
as the owner’s share. From the vague answers to his question how much
hay had been cut on the principal meadow, from the hurry of the village
elder who had made the division, not asking leave, from the whole tone
of the peasant, Levin perceived that there was something wrong in the
division of the hay, and made up his mind to drive over himself to look
into the matter.

Arriving for dinner at the village, and leaving his horse at the cottage
of an old friend of his, the husband of his brother’s wet-nurse, Levin
went to see the old man in his bee-house, wanting to find out from him
the truth about the hay. Parmenitch, a talkative, comely old man, gave
Levin a very warm welcome, showed him all he was doing, told him
everything about his bees and the swarms of that year; but gave vague
and unwilling answers to Levin’s inquiries about the mowing. This
confirmed Levin still more in his suspicions. He went to the hay fields
and examined the stacks. The haystacks could not possibly contain fifty
wagon-loads each, and to convict the peasants Levin ordered the wagons
that had carried the hay to be brought up directly, to lift one stack,
and carry it into the barn. There turned out to be only thirty-two loads
in the stack. In spite of the village elder’s assertions about the
compressibility of hay, and its having settled down in the stacks, and
his swearing that everything had been done in the fear of God, Levin
stuck to his point that the hay had been divided without his orders, and
that, therefore, he would not accept that hay as fifty loads to a stack.
After a prolonged dispute the matter was decided by the peasants taking
these eleven stacks, reckoning them as fifty loads each. The arguments
and the division of the haycocks lasted the whole afternoon. When the
last of the hay had been divided, Levin, intrusting the superintendence
of the rest to the counting-house clerk, sat down on a haycock marked
off by a stake of willow, and looked admiringly at the meadow swarming
with peasants.

"What weather for haying! What hay it’ll be!" said an old man, squatting
down beside Levin. "It’s tea, not hay! It’s like scattering grain to the
ducks, the way they pick it up!" he added, pointing to the growing
haycocks. "Since dinnertime they’ve carried a good half of it."

"Who’s that? Your son?" asked Levin.

Levin looked more attentively at Ivan Parmenov and his wife. They were
loading a haycock onto the cart not far from him. Ivan Parmenov was
standing on the cart, taking, laying in place, and stamping down the
huge bundles of hay, which his pretty young wife deftly handed up to
him, at first in armfuls, and then on the pitchfork. The young wife
worked easily, merrily, and dexterously. The close-packed hay did not
once break away off her fork. First she gathered it together, stuck the
fork into it, then with a rapid, supple movement leaned the whole weight
of her body on it, and at once with a bend of her back under the red
belt she drew herself up, and arching her full bosom under the white
smock, with a smart turn swung the fork in her arms, and flung the
bundle of hay high onto the cart. Ivan, obviously doing his best to save
her every minute of unnecessary labor, made haste, opening his arms to
clutch the bundle and lay it in the cart. As she raked together what was
left of the hay, the young wife shook off the bits of hay that had
fallen on her neck, and straightening the red kerchief that had dropped
forward over her white brow, not browned like her face by the sun, she
crept under the cart to tie up the load. Ivan directed her how to fasten
the cord to the cross-piece, and at something she said he laughed aloud.
In the expressions of both faces was to be seen vigorous, young, freshly
awakened love.

The women, all singing, began to come close to Levin, and he felt as
though a storm were swooping down upon him with a thunder of merriment.
The storm swooped down, enveloped him and the haycock on which he was
lying, and the other haycocks, and the wagon-loads, and the whole meadow
and distant fields all seemed to be shaking and singing to the measures
of this wild merry song with its shouts and whistles and clapping. Levin
felt envious of this health and mirthfulness; he longed to take part in
the expression of this joy of life. But he could do nothing, and had to
lie and look on and listen. When the peasants, with their singing, had
vanished out of sight and hearing, a weary feeling of despondency at his
own isolation, his physical inactivity, his alienation from this world,
came over Levin.

Often Levin had admired this life, often he had a sense of envy of the
men who led this life; but today for the first time, especially under
the influence of what he had seen in the attitude of Ivan Parmenov to
his young wife, the idea presented itself definitely to his mind that it
was in his power to exchange the dreary, artificial, idle, and
individualistic life he was leading for this laborious, pure, and
socially delightful life.

The old man who had been sitting beside him had long ago gone home; the
people had all separated. Those who lived near had gone home, while
those who came from far were gathered into a group for supper, and to
spend the night in the meadow. Levin, unobserved by the peasants, still
lay on the haycock, and still looked on and listened and mused. The
peasants who remained for the night in the meadow scarcely slept all the
short summer night. At first there was the sound of merry talk and
laughing all together over the supper, then singing again and laughter.

All the long day of toil had left no trace in them but lightness of
heart. Before the early dawn all was hushed. Nothing was to be heard but
the night sounds of the frogs that never ceased in the marsh, and the
horses snorting in the mist that rose over the meadow before the
morning. Rousing himself, Levin got up from the haycock, and looking at
the stars, he saw that the night was over.

Shrinking from the cold, Levin walked rapidly, looking at the ground.
"What’s that? Someone coming," he thought, catching the tinkle of bells,
and lifting his head. Forty paces from him a carriage with four horses
harnessed abreast was driving towards him along the grassy road on which
he was walking. The shaft-horses were tilted against the shafts by the
ruts, but the dexterous driver sitting on the box held the shaft over
the ruts, so that the wheels ran on the smooth part of the road.

This was all Levin noticed, and without wondering who it could be, he
gazed absently at the coach.

In the coach was an old lady dozing in one corner, and at the window,
evidently only just awake, sat a young girl holding in both hands the
ribbons of a white cap. With a face full of light and thought, full of a
subtle, complex inner life, that was remote from Levin, she was gazing
beyond him at the glow of the sunrise.

He could not be mistaken. There were no other eyes like those in the
world. There was only one creature in the world that could concentrate
for him all the brightness and meaning of life. It was she. It was
Kitty. He understood that she was driving to Ergushovo from the railway
station. And everything that had been stirring Levin during that
sleepless night, all the resolutions he had made, all vanished at once.
He recalled with horror his dreams of marrying a peasant girl. There
only, in the carriage that had crossed over to the other side of the
road, and was rapidly disappearing, there only could he find the
solution of the riddle of his life, which had weighed so agonizingly
upon him of late.

The night spent by Levin on the haycock did not pass without result for
him. The way in which he had been managing his land revolted him and had
lost all attraction for him. In spite of the magnificent harvest, never
had there been, or, at least, never it seemed to him, had there been so
many hindrances and so many quarrels between him and the peasants as
that year, and the origin of these failures and this hostility was now
perfectly comprehensible to him. The delight he had experienced in the
work itself, and the consequent greater intimacy with the peasants, the
envy he felt of them, of their life, the desire to adopt that life,
which had been to him that night not a dream but an intention, the
execution of which he had thought out in detail—all this had so
transformed his view of the farming of the land as he had managed it,
that he could not take his former interest in it, and could not help
seeing that unpleasant relation between him and the workpeople which was
the foundation of it all. The herd of improved cows such as Pava, the
whole land ploughed over and enriched, the nine level fields surrounded
with hedges, the two hundred and forty acres heavily manured, the seed
sown in drills, and all the rest of it—it was all splendid if only the
work had been done for themselves, or for themselves and comrades—people
in sympathy with them. But he saw clearly now (his work on a book of
agriculture, in which the chief element in husbandry was to have been
the laborer, greatly assisted him in this) that the sort of farming he
was carrying on was nothing but a cruel and stubborn struggle between
him and the laborers, in which there was on one side—his side—a
continual intense effort to change everything to a pattern he considered
better; on the other side, the natural order of things. And in this
struggle he saw that with immense expenditure of force on his side, and
with no effort or even intention on the other side, all that was
attained was that the work did not go to the liking of either side, and
that splendid tools, splendid cattle and land were spoiled with no good
to anyone. Worst of all, the energy expended on this work was not simply
wasted. He could not help feeling now, since the meaning of this system
had become clear to him, that the aim of his energy was a most unworthy
one. In reality, what was the struggle about? He was struggling for
every farthing of his share (and he could not help it, for he had only
to relax his efforts, and he would not have had the money to pay his
laborers’ wages), while they were only struggling to be able to do their
work easily and agreeably, that is to say, as they were used to doing
it. It was for his interests that every laborer should work as hard as
possible, and that while doing so he should keep his wits about him, so
as to try not to break the winnowing machines, the horse rakes, the
thrashing machines, that he should attend to what he was doing. What the
laborer wanted was to work as pleasantly as possible, with rests, and
above all, carelessly and heedlessly, without thinking. That summer
Levin saw this at every step. He sent the men to mow some clover for
hay, picking out the worst patches where the clover was overgrown with
grass and weeds and of no use for seed; again and again they mowed the
best acres of clover, justifying themselves by the pretense that the
bailiff had told them to, and trying to pacify him with the assurance
that it would be splendid hay; but he knew that it was owing to those
acres being so much easier to mow. He sent out a hay machine for
pitching the hay—it was broken at the first row because it was dull work
for a peasant to sit on the seat in front with the great wings waving
above him. And he was told, "Don’t trouble, your honor, sure, the
womenfolks will pitch it quick enough." The ploughs were practically
useless, because it never occurred to the laborer to raise the share
when he turned the plough, and forcing it round, he strained the horses
and tore up the ground, and Levin was begged not to mind about it. The
horses were allowed to stray into the wheat because not a single laborer
would consent to be night-watchman, and in spite of orders to the
contrary, the laborers insisted on taking turns for night duty, and
Ivan, after working all day long, fell asleep, and was very penitent for
his fault, saying, "Do what you will to me, your honor."

They killed three of the best calves by letting them into the clover
aftermath without care as to their drinking, and nothing would make the
men believe that they had been blown out by the clover, but they told
him, by way of consolation, that one of his neighbors had lost a hundred
and twelve head of cattle in three days. All this happened, not because
anyone felt ill-will to Levin or his farm; on the contrary, he knew that
they liked him, thought him a simple gentleman (their highest praise);
but it happened simply because all they wanted was to work merrily and
carelessly, and his interests were not only remote and incomprehensible
to them, but fatally opposed to their most just claims. Long before,
Levin had felt dissatisfaction with his own position in regard to the
land. He saw where his boat leaked, but he did not look for the leak,
perhaps purposely deceiving himself. (Nothing would be left him if he
lost faith in it.) But now he could deceive himself no longer. The
farming of the land, as he was managing it, had become not merely
unattractive but revolting to him, and he could take no further interest
in it.

To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-five miles off, of
Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, whom he longed to see and could not see. Darya
Alexandrovna Oblonskaya had invited him, when he was over there, to
come; to come with the object of renewing his offer to her sister, who
would, so she gave him to understand, accept him now. Levin himself had
felt on seeing Kitty Shtcherbatskaya that he had never ceased to love
her; but he could not go over to the Oblonskys’, knowing she was there.
The fact that he had made her an offer, and she had refused him, had
placed an insuperable barrier between her and him. "I can’t ask her to
be my wife merely because she can’t be the wife of the man she wanted to
marry," he said to himself. The thought of this made him cold and
hostile to her. "I should not be able to speak to her without a feeling
of reproach; I could not look at her without resentment; and she will
only hate me all the more, as she’s bound to. And besides, how can I
now, after what Darya Alexandrovna told me, go to see them? Can I help
showing that I know what she told me? And me to go magnanimously to
forgive her, and have pity on her! Me go through a performance before
her of forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!... What induced
Darya Alexandrovna to tell me that? By chance I might have seen her,
then everything would have happened of itself; but, as it is, it’s out
of the question, out of the question!"

This was more than he could stand. How could a woman of any
intelligence, of any delicacy, put her sister in such a humiliating
position! He wrote ten notes, and tore them all up, and sent the saddle
without any reply. To write that he would go was impossible, because he
could not go; to write that he could not come because something
prevented him, or that he would be away, that was still worse. He sent
the saddle without an answer, and with a sense of having done something
shameful; he handed over all the now revolting business of the estate to
the bailiff, and set off next day to a remote district to see his friend
Sviazhsky, who had splendid marshes for grouse in his neighborhood, and
had lately written to ask him to keep a long-standing promise to stay
with him. The grouse-marsh, in the Surovsky district, had long tempted
Levin, but he had continually put off this visit on account of his work
on the estate. Now he was glad to get away from the neighborhood of the
Shtcherbatskys, and still more from his farm work, especially on a
shooting expedition, which always in trouble served as the best
consolation.

In the Surovsky district there was no railway nor service of post
horses, and Levin drove there with his own horses in his big,
old-fashioned carriage.

He stopped halfway at a well-to-do peasant’s to feed his horses. A bald,
well-preserved old man, with a broad, red beard, gray on his cheeks,
opened the gate, squeezing against the gatepost to let the three horses
pass. Directing the coachman to a place under the shed in the big,
clean, tidy yard, with charred, old-fashioned ploughs in it, the old man
asked Levin to come into the parlor. A cleanly dressed young woman, with
clogs on her bare feet, was scrubbing the floor in the new outer room.
She was frightened of the dog, that ran in after Levin, and uttered a
shriek, but began laughing at her own fright at once when she was told
the dog would not hurt her. Pointing Levin with her bare arm to the door
into the parlor, she bent down again, hiding her handsome face, and went
on scrubbing.

The parlor was a big room, with a Dutch stove, and a screen dividing it
into two. Under the holy pictures stood a table painted in patterns, a
bench, and two chairs. Near the entrance was a dresser full of crockery.
The shutters were closed, there were few flies, and it was so clean that
Levin was anxious that Laska, who had been running along the road and
bathing in puddles, should not muddy the floor, and ordered her to a
place in the corner by the door. After looking round the parlor, Levin
went out in the back yard. The good-looking young woman in clogs,
swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on before him to the well for
water.

"Look sharp, my girl!" the old man shouted after her, good-humoredly,
and he went up to Levin. "Well, sir, are you going to Nikolay Ivanovitch
Sviazhsky? His honor comes to us too," he began, chatting, leaning his
elbows on the railing of the steps. In the middle of the old man’s
account of his acquaintance with Sviazhsky, the gates creaked again, and
laborers came into the yard from the fields, with wooden ploughs and
harrows. The horses harnessed to the ploughs and harrows were sleek and
fat. The laborers were obviously of the household: two were young men in
cotton shirts and caps, the two others were hired laborers in homespun
shirts, one an old man, the other a young fellow. Moving off from the
steps, the old man went up to the horses and began unharnessing them.

"What have they been ploughing?" asked Levin.

The samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and the family, having
disposed of the horses, came in to dinner. Levin, getting his provisions
out of his carriage, invited the old man to take tea with him.

Over their tea Levin heard all about the old man’s farming. Ten years
before, the old man had rented three hundred acres from the lady who
owned them, and a year ago he had bought them and rented another three
hundred from a neighboring landowner. A small part of the land—the worst
part—he let out for rent, while a hundred acres of arable land he
cultivated himself with his family and two hired laborers. The old man
complained that things were doing badly. But Levin saw that he simply
did so from a feeling of propriety, and that his farm was in a
flourishing condition. If it had been unsuccessful he would not have
bought land at thirty-five roubles the acre, he would not have married
his three sons and a nephew, he would not have rebuilt twice after
fires, and each time on a larger scale. In spite of the old man’s
complaints, it was evident that he was proud, and justly proud, of his
prosperity, proud of his sons, his nephew, his sons’ wives, his horses
and his cows, and especially of the fact that he was keeping all this
farming going. From his conversation with the old man, Levin thought he
was not averse to new methods either. He had planted a great many
potatoes, and his potatoes, as Levin had seen driving past, were already
past flowering and beginning to die down, while Levin’s were only just
coming into flower. He earthed up his potatoes with a modern plough
borrowed from a neighboring landowner. He sowed wheat. The trifling fact
that, thinning out his rye, the old man used the rye he thinned out for
his horses, specially struck Levin. How many times had Levin seen this
splendid fodder wasted, and tried to get it saved; but always it had
turned out to be impossible. The peasant got this done, and he could not
say enough in praise of it as food for the beasts.

"Well, we landowners can’t manage well with our laborers," said Levin,
handing him a glass of tea.

"Yes, yes, that’s how it is, sir!" said the old man, getting up, and
crossing himself deliberately, he thanked Levin and went out.

When Levin went into the kitchen to call his coachman he saw the whole
family at dinner. The women were standing up waiting on them. The young,
sturdy-looking son was telling something funny with his mouth full of
pudding, and they were all laughing, the woman in the clogs, who was
pouring cabbage soup into a bowl, laughing most merrily of all.

Very probably the good-looking face of the young woman in the clogs had
a good deal to do with the impression of well-being this peasant
household made upon Levin, but the impression was so strong that Levin
could never get rid of it. And all the way from the old peasant’s to
Sviazhsky’s he kept recalling this peasant farm as though there were
something in this impression that demanded his special attention.

Sviazhsky was the marshal of his district. He was five years older than
Levin, and had long been married. His sister-in-law, a young girl Levin
liked very much, lived in his house; and Levin knew that Sviazhsky and
his wife would have greatly liked to marry the girl to him. He knew this
with certainty, as so-called eligible young men always know it, though
he could never have brought himself to speak of it to anyone; and he
knew too that, although he wanted to get married, and although by every
token this very attractive girl would make an excellent wife, he could
no more have married her, even if he had not been in love with Kitty
Shtcherbatskaya, than he could have flown up to the sky. And this
knowledge poisoned the pleasure he had hoped to find in the visit to
Sviazhsky.

On getting Sviazhsky’s letter with the invitation for shooting, Levin
had immediately thought of this; but in spite of it he had made up his
mind that Sviazhsky’s having such views for him was simply his own
groundless supposition, and so he would go, all the same. Besides, at
the bottom of his heart he had a desire to try himself, put himself to
the test in regard to this girl. The Sviazhskys’ home-life was
exceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhsky himself, the best type of man taking
part in local affairs that Levin knew, was very interesting to him.

Sviazhsky was one of those people, always a source of wonder to Levin,
whose convictions, very logical though never original, go one way by
themselves, while their life, exceedingly definite and firm in its
direction, goes its way quite apart and almost always in direct
contradiction to their convictions. Sviazhsky was an extremely advanced
man. He despised the nobility, and believed the mass of the nobility to
be secretly in favor of serfdom, and only concealing their views from
cowardice. He regarded Russia as a ruined country, rather after the
style of Turkey, and the government of Russia as so bad that he never
permitted himself to criticize its doings seriously, and yet he was a
functionary of that government and a model marshal of nobility, and when
he drove about he always wore the cockade of office and the cap with the
red band. He considered human life only tolerable abroad, and went
abroad to stay at every opportunity, and at the same time he carried on
a complex and improved system of agriculture in Russia, and with extreme
interest followed everything and knew everything that was being done in
Russia. He considered the Russian peasant as occupying a stage of
development intermediate between the ape and the man, and at the same
time in the local assemblies no one was readier to shake hands with the
peasants and listen to their opinion. He believed neither in God nor the
devil, but was much concerned about the question of the improvement of
the clergy and the maintenance of their revenues, and took special
trouble to keep up the church in his village.

If it had not been a characteristic of Levin’s to put the most favorable
interpretation on people, Sviazhsky’s character would have presented no
doubt or difficulty to him: he would have said to himself, "a fool or a
knave," and everything would have seemed clear. But he could not say "a
fool," because Sviazhsky was unmistakably clever, and moreover, a highly
cultivated man, who was exceptionally modest over his culture. There was
not a subject he knew nothing of. But he did not display his knowledge
except when he was compelled to do so. Still less could Levin say that
he was a knave, as Sviazhsky was unmistakably an honest, good-hearted,
sensible man, who worked good-humoredly, keenly, and perseveringly at
his work; he was held in high honor by everyone about him, and certainly
he had never consciously done, and was indeed incapable of doing,
anything base.

Levin tried to understand him, and could not understand him, and looked
at him and his life as at a living enigma.

Levin and he were very friendly, and so Levin used to venture to sound
Sviazhsky, to try to get at the very foundation of his view of life; but
it was always in vain. Every time Levin tried to penetrate beyond the
outer chambers of Sviazhsky’s mind, which were hospitably open to all,
he noticed that Sviazhsky was slightly disconcerted; faint signs of
alarm were visible in his eyes, as though he were afraid Levin would
understand him, and he would give him a kindly, good-humored repulse.

Just now, since his disenchantment with farming, Levin was particularly
glad to stay with Sviazhsky. Apart from the fact that the sight of this
happy and affectionate couple, so pleased with themselves and everyone
else, and their well-ordered home had always a cheering effect on Levin,
he felt a longing, now that he was so dissatisfied with his own life, to
get at that secret in Sviazhsky that gave him such clearness,
definiteness, and good courage in life. Moreover, Levin knew that at
Sviazhsky’s he should meet the landowners of the neighborhood, and it
was particularly interesting for him just now to hear and take part in
those rural conversations concerning crops, laborers’ wages, and so on,
which, he was aware, are conventionally regarded as something very low,
but which seemed to him just now to constitute the one subject of
importance. "It was not, perhaps, of importance in the days of serfdom,
and it may not be of importance in England. In both cases the conditions
of agriculture are firmly established; but among us now, when everything
has been turned upside down and is only just taking shape, the question
what form these conditions will take is the one question of importance
in Russia," thought Levin.

The shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had expected. The marsh
was dry and there were no grouse at all. He walked about the whole day
and only brought back three birds, but to make up for that—he brought
back, as he always did from shooting, an excellent appetite, excellent
spirits, and that keen, intellectual mood which with him always
accompanied violent physical exertion. And while out shooting, when he
seemed to be thinking of nothing at all, suddenly the old man and his
family kept coming back to his mind, and the impression of them seemed
to claim not merely his attention, but the solution of some question
connected with them.

In the evening at tea, two landowners who had come about some business
connected with a wardship were of the party, and the interesting
conversation Levin had been looking forward to sprang up.

Levin was sitting beside his hostess at the tea table, and was obliged
to keep up a conversation with her and her sister, who was sitting
opposite him. Madame Sviazhskaya was a round-faced, fair-haired, rather
short woman, all smiles and dimples. Levin tried through her to get a
solution of the weighty enigma her husband presented to his mind; but he
had not complete freedom of ideas, because he was in an agony of
embarrassment. This agony of embarrassment was due to the fact that the
sister-in-law was sitting opposite to him, in a dress, specially put on,
as he fancied, for his benefit, cut particularly open, in the shape of a
trapeze, on her white bosom. This quadrangular opening, in spite of the
bosom’s being very white, or just because it was very white, deprived
Levin of the full use of his faculties. He imagined, probably
mistakenly, that this low-necked bodice had been made on his account,
and felt that he had no right to look at it, and tried not to look at
it; but he felt that he was to blame for the very fact of the low-necked
bodice having been made. It seemed to Levin that he had deceived
someone, that he ought to explain something, but that to explain it was
impossible, and for that reason he was continually blushing, was ill at
ease and awkward. His awkwardness infected the pretty sister-in-law too.
But their hostess appeared not to observe this, and kept purposely
drawing her into the conversation.

"You teach in it yourself?" asked Levin, trying to look above the open
neck, but feeling that wherever he looked in that direction he should
see it.

"No, thank you, I won’t have any more tea," said Levin, and conscious of
doing a rude thing, but incapable of continuing the conversation, he got
up, blushing. "I hear a very interesting conversation," he added, and
walked to the other end of the table, where Sviazhsky was sitting with
the two gentlemen of the neighborhood. Sviazhsky was sitting sideways,
with one elbow on the table, and a cup in one hand, while with the other
hand he gathered up his beard, held it to his nose and let it drop
again, as though he were smelling it. His brilliant black eyes were
looking straight at the excited country gentleman with gray whiskers,
and apparently he derived amusement from his remarks. The gentleman was
complaining of the peasants. It was evident to Levin that Sviazhsky knew
an answer to this gentleman’s complaints, which would at once demolish
his whole contention, but that in his position he could not give
utterance to this answer, and listened, not without pleasure, to the
landowner’s comic speeches.

The gentleman with the gray whiskers was obviously an inveterate
adherent of serfdom and a devoted agriculturist, who had lived all his
life in the country. Levin saw proofs of this in his dress, in the
old-fashioned threadbare coat, obviously not his everyday attire, in his
shrewd, deep-set eyes, in his idiomatic, fluent Russian, in the
imperious tone that had become habitual from long use, and in the
resolute gestures of his large, red, sunburnt hands, with an old
betrothal ring on the little finger.

"But you see we manage our land without such extreme measures," said he,
smiling: "Levin and I and this gentleman."

Levin, who had long been familiar with these patriarchal methods,
exchanged glances with Sviazhsky and interrupted Mihail Petrovitch,
turning again to the gentleman with the gray whiskers.

Sviazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even made a faint
gesture of irony to him; but Levin did not think the landowner’s words
absurd, he understood them better than he did Sviazhsky. A great deal
more of what the gentleman with the gray whiskers said to show in what
way Russia was ruined by the emancipation struck him indeed as very
true, new to him, and quite incontestable. The landowner unmistakably
spoke his own individual thought—a thing that very rarely happens—and a
thought to which he had been brought not by a desire of finding some
exercise for an idle brain, but a thought which had grown up out of the
conditions of his life, which he had brooded over in the solitude of his
village, and had considered in every aspect.

"There it is—the labor force—the chief element in agriculture," thought
Levin.

This did not interest Levin, but when he had finished, Levin went back
to his first position, and, addressing Sviazhsky, and trying to draw him
into expressing his serious opinion:-‘

"I don’t agree that it’s necessary or possible to raise the level of
agriculture still higher," said Levin. "I devote myself to it, and I
have means, but I can do nothing. As to the banks, I don’t know to whom
they’re any good. For my part, anyway, whatever I’ve spent money on in
the way of husbandry, it has been a loss: stock—a loss, machinery—a
loss."

"And I’m not the only one," pursued Levin. "I mix with all the
neighboring landowners, who are cultivating their land on a rational
system; they all, with rare exceptions, are doing so at a loss. Come,
tell us how does your land do—does it pay?" said Levin, and at once in
Sviazhsky’s eyes he detected that fleeting expression of alarm which he
had noticed whenever he had tried to penetrate beyond the outer chambers
of Sviazhsky’s mind.

Moreover, this question on Levin’s part was not quite in good faith.
Madame Sviazhskaya had just told him at tea that they had that summer
invited a German expert in bookkeeping from Moscow, who for a
consideration of five hundred roubles had investigated the management of
their property, and found that it was costing them a loss of three
thousand odd roubles. She did not remember the precise sum, but it
appeared that the German had worked it out to the fraction of a
farthing.

"Oh, rent!" Levin cried with horror. "Rent there may be in Europe, where
land has been improved by the labor put into it, but with us all the
land is deteriorating from the labor put into it—in other words they’re
working it out; so there’s no question of rent."

And in the happiest frame of mind Sviazhsky got up and walked off,
apparently supposing the conversation to have ended at the very point
when to Levin it seemed that it was only just beginning.

Having lost his antagonist, Levin continued the conversation with the
gray-whiskered landowner, trying to prove to him that all the difficulty
arises from the fact that we don’t find out the peculiarities and habits
of our laborer; but the landowner, like all men who think independently
and in isolation, was slow in taking in any other person’s idea, and
particularly partial to his own. He stuck to it that the Russian peasant
is a swine and likes swinishness, and that to get him out of his
swinishness one must have authority, and there is none; one must have
the stick, and we have become so liberal that we have all of a sudden
replaced the stick that served us for a thousand years by lawyers and
model prisons, where the worthless, stinking peasant is fed on good soup
and has a fixed allowance of cubic feet of air.

"What makes you think," said Levin, trying to get back to the question,
"that it’s impossible to find some relation to the laborer in which the
labor would become productive?"

"That’s just what I was meaning," answered Levin. "Why shouldn’t we seek
them for ourselves?"

"But if they don’t do for us, if they’re stupid?" said Levin.

The two neighbors had risen, and Sviazhsky, once more checking Levin in
his inconvenient habit of peeping into what was beyond the outer
chambers of his mind, went to see his guests out.

Levin was insufferably bored that evening with the ladies; he was
stirred as he had never been before by the idea that the dissatisfaction
he was feeling with his system of managing his land was not an
exceptional case, but the general condition of things in Russia; that
the organization of some relation of the laborers to the soil in which
they would work, as with the peasant he had met half-way to the
Sviazhskys’, was not a dream, but a problem which must be solved. And it
seemed to him that the problem could be solved, and that he ought to try
and solve it.

After saying good-night to the ladies, and promising to stay the whole
of the next day, so as to make an expedition on horseback with them to
see an interesting ruin in the crown forest, Levin went, before going to
bed, into his host’s study to get the books on the labor question that
Sviazhsky had offered him. Sviazhsky’s study was a huge room, surrounded
by bookcases and with two tables in it—one a massive writing table,
standing in the middle of the room, and the other a round table, covered
with recent numbers of reviews and journals in different languages,
ranged like the rays of a star round the lamp. On the writing table was
a stand of drawers marked with gold lettering, and full of papers of
various sorts.

"What are you looking at there?" he said to Levin, who was standing at
the round table looking through the reviews.

"Oh, yes, there’s a very interesting article here," said Sviazhsky of
the review Levin was holding in his hand. "It appears," he went on, with
eager interest, "that Friedrich was not, after all, the person chiefly
responsible for the partition of Poland. It is proved..."

And with his characteristic clearness, he summed up those new, very
important, and interesting revelations. Although Levin was engrossed at
the moment by his ideas about the problem of the land, he wondered, as
he heard Sviazhsky: "What is there inside of him? And why, why is he
interested in the partition of Poland?" When Sviazhsky had finished,
Levin could not help asking: "Well, and what then?" But there was
nothing to follow. It was simply interesting that it had been proved to
be so and so. But Sviazhsky did not explain, and saw no need to explain
why it was interesting to him.

"Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable neighbor," said
Levin, sighing. "He’s a clever fellow, and said a lot that was true."

"I’ll tell you what interests me very much," said Levin. "He’s right
that our system, that’s to say of rational farming, doesn’t answer, that
the only thing that answers is the money-lender system, like that
meek-looking gentleman’s, or else the very simplest.... Whose fault is
it?"

"Well, that’s a thing I’ve never understood," Levin replied with heat.
"In what way are schools going to help the people to improve their
material position? You say schools, education, will give them fresh
wants. So much the worse, since they won’t be capable of satisfying
them. And in what way a knowledge of addition and subtraction and the
catechism is going to improve their material condition, I never could
make out. The day before yesterday, I met a peasant woman in the evening
with a little baby, and asked her where she was going. She said she was
going to the wise woman; her boy had screaming fits, so she was taking
him to be doctored. I asked, ‘Why, how does the wise woman cure
screaming fits?’ ‘She puts the child on the hen-roost and repeats some
charm....’"

"Oh, no!" said Levin with annoyance; "that method of doctoring I merely
meant as a simile for doctoring the people with schools. The people are
poor and ignorant—that we see as surely as the peasant woman sees the
baby is ill because it screams. But in what way this trouble of poverty
and ignorance is to be cured by schools is as incomprehensible as how
the hen-roost affects the screaming. What has to be cured is what makes
him poor."

"And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about it?" asked Levin.

Levin saw that he was not to discover the connection between this man’s
life and his thoughts. Obviously he did not care in the least what his
reasoning led him to; all he wanted was the process of reasoning. And he
did not like it when the process of reasoning brought him into a blind
alley. That was the only thing he disliked, and avoided by changing the
conversation to something agreeable and amusing.

All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression made by
the old peasant, which served, as it were, as the fundamental basis of
all the conceptions and ideas of the day, threw Levin into violent
excitement. This dear good Sviazhsky, keeping a stock of ideas simply
for social purposes, and obviously having some other principles hidden
from Levin, while with the crowd, whose name is legion, he guided public
opinion by ideas he did not share; that irascible country gentleman,
perfectly correct in the conclusions that he had been worried into by
life, but wrong in his exasperation against a whole class, and that the
best class in Russia; his own dissatisfaction with the work he had been
doing, and the vague hope of finding a remedy for all this—all was
blended in a sense of inward turmoil, and anticipation of some solution
near at hand.

Left alone in the room assigned him, lying on a spring mattress that
yielded unexpectedly at every movement of his arm or his leg, Levin did
not fall asleep for a long while. Not one conversation with Sviazhsky,
though he had said a great deal that was clever, had interested Levin;
but the conclusions of the irascible landowner required consideration.
Levin could not help recalling every word he had said, and in
imagination amending his own replies.

This idea threw Levin into a great excitement. He did not sleep half the
night, thinking over in detail the putting of his idea into practice. He
had not intended to go away next day, but he now determined to go home
early in the morning. Besides, the sister-in-law with her low-necked
bodice aroused in him a feeling akin to shame and remorse for some
utterly base action. Most important of all—he must get back without
delay: he would have to make haste to put his new project to the
peasants before the sowing of the winter wheat, so that the sowing might
be undertaken on a new basis. He had made up his mind to revolutionize
his whole system.

The carrying out of Levin’s plan presented many difficulties; but he
struggled on, doing his utmost, and attained a result which, though not
what he desired, was enough to enable him, without self-deception, to
believe that the attempt was worth the trouble. One of the chief
difficulties was that the process of cultivating the land was in full
swing, that it was impossible to stop everything and begin it all again
from the beginning, and the machine had to be mended while in motion.

When on the evening that he arrived home he informed the bailiff of his
plans, the latter with visible pleasure agreed with what he said so long
as he was pointing out that all that had been done up to that time was
stupid and useless. The bailiff said that he had said so a long while
ago, but no heed had been paid him. But as for the proposal made by
Levin—to take a part as shareholder with his laborers in each
agricultural undertaking—at this the bailiff simply expressed a profound
despondency, and offered no definite opinion, but began immediately
talking of the urgent necessity of carrying the remaining sheaves of rye
the next day, and of sending the men out for the second ploughing, so
that Levin felt that this was not the time for discussing it.

The simple-hearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed completely to grasp Levin’s
proposal—that he should with his family take a share of the profits of
the cattle-yard—and he was in complete sympathy with the plan. But when
Levin hinted at the future advantages, Ivan’s face expressed alarm and
regret that he could not hear all he had to say, and he made haste to
find himself some task that would admit of no delay: he either snatched
up the fork to pitch the hay out of the pens, or ran to get water or to
clear out the dung.

Another difficulty lay in the invincible disbelief of the peasant that a
landowner’s object could be anything else than a desire to squeeze all
he could out of them. They were firmly convinced that his real aim
(whatever he might say to them) would always be in what he did not say
to them. And they themselves, in giving their opinion, said a great deal
but never said what was their real object. Moreover (Levin felt that the
irascible landowner had been right) the peasants made their first and
unalterable condition of any agreement whatever that they should not be
forced to any new methods of tillage of any kind, nor to use new
implements. They agreed that the modern plough ploughed better, that the
scarifier did the work more quickly, but they found thousands of reasons
that made it out of the question for them to use either of them; and
though he had accepted the conviction that he would have to lower the
standard of cultivation, he felt sorry to give up improved methods, the
advantages of which were so obvious. But in spite of all these
difficulties he got his way, and by autumn the system was working, or at
least so it seemed to him.

At first Levin had thought of giving up the whole farming of the land
just as it was to the peasants, the laborers, and the bailiff on new
conditions of partnership; but he was very soon convinced that this was
impossible, and determined to divide it up. The cattle-yard, the garden,
hay fields, and arable land, divided into several parts, had to be made
into separate lots. The simple-hearted cowherd, Ivan, who, Levin
fancied, understood the matter better than any of them, collecting
together a gang of workers to help him, principally of his own family,
became a partner in the cattle-yard. A distant part of the estate, a
tract of waste land that had lain fallow for eight years, was with the
help of the clever carpenter, Fyodor Ryezunov, taken by six families of
peasants on new conditions of partnership, and the peasant Shuraev took
the management of all the vegetable gardens on the same terms. The
remainder of the land was still worked on the old system, but these
three associated partnerships were the first step to a new organization
of the whole, and they completely took up Levin’s time.

It is true that Fyodor Ryezunov’s company did not plough over the ground
twice before sowing, as had been agreed, justifying themselves on the
plea that the time was too short. It is true that the peasants of the
same company, though they had agreed to work the land on new conditions,
always spoke of the land, not as held in partnership, but as rented for
half the crop, and more than once the peasants and Ryezunov himself said
to Levin, "If you would take a rent for the land, it would save you
trouble, and we should be more free." Moreover the same peasants kept
putting off, on various excuses, the building of a cattleyard and barn
on the land as agreed upon, and delayed doing it till the winter.

Often, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to them all the
advantages of the plan, Levin felt that the peasants heard nothing but
the sound of his voice, and were firmly resolved, whatever he might say,
not to let themselves be taken in. He felt this especially when he
talked to the cleverest of the peasants, Ryezunov, and detected the
gleam in Ryezunov’s eyes which showed so plainly both ironical amusement
at Levin, and the firm conviction that, if any one were to be taken in,
it would not be he, Ryezunov. But in spite of all this Levin thought the
system worked, and that by keeping accounts strictly and insisting on
his own way, he would prove to them in the future the advantages of the
arrangement, and then the system would go of itself.

These matters, together with the management of the land still left on
his hands, and the indoor work over his book, so engrossed Levin the
whole summer that he scarcely ever went out shooting. At the end of
August he heard that the Oblonskys had gone away to Moscow, from their
servant who brought back the side-saddle. He felt that in not answering
Darya Alexandrovna’s letter he had by his rudeness, of which he could
not think without a flush of shame, burned his ships, and that he would
never go and see them again. He had been just as rude with the
Sviazhskys, leaving them without saying good-bye. But he would never go
to see them again either. He did not care about that now. The business
of reorganizing the farming of his land absorbed him as completely as
though there would never be anything else in his life. He read the books
lent him by Sviazhsky, and copying out what he had not got, he read both
the economic and socialistic books on the subject, but, as he had
anticipated, found nothing bearing on the scheme he had undertaken. In
the books on political economy—in Mill, for instance, whom he studied
first with great ardor, hoping every minute to find an answer to the
questions that were engrossing him—he found laws deduced from the
condition of land culture in Europe; but he did not see why these laws,
which did not apply in Russia, must be general. He saw just the same
thing in the socialistic books: either they were the beautiful but
impracticable fantasies which had fascinated him when he was a student,
or they were attempts at improving, rectifying the economic position in
which Europe was placed, with which the system of land tenure in Russia
had nothing in common. Political economy told him that the laws by which
the wealth of Europe had been developed, and was developing, were
universal and unvarying. Socialism told him that development along these
lines leads to ruin. And neither of them gave an answer, or even a hint,
in reply to the question what he, Levin, and all the Russian peasants
and landowners, were to do with their millions of hands and millions of
acres, to make them as productive as possible for the common weal.

At the end of September the timber had been carted for building the
cattleyard on the land that had been allotted to the association of
peasants, and the butter from the cows was sold and the profits divided.
In practice the system worked capitally, or, at least, so it seemed to
Levin. In order to work out the whole subject theoretically and to
complete his book, which, in Levin’s daydreams, was not merely to effect
a revolution in political economy, but to annihilate that science
entirely and to lay the foundation of a new science of the relation of
the people to the soil, all that was left to do was to make a tour
abroad, and to study on the spot all that had been done in the same
direction, and to collect conclusive evidence that all that had been
done there was not what was wanted. Levin was only waiting for the
delivery of his wheat to receive the money for it and go abroad. But the
rains began, preventing the harvesting of the corn and potatoes left in
the fields, and putting a stop to all work, even to the delivery of the
wheat.

On the 30th of September the sun came out in the morning, and hoping for
fine weather, Levin began making final preparations for his journey. He
gave orders for the wheat to be delivered, sent the bailiff to the
merchant to get the money owing him, and went out himself to give some
final directions on the estate before setting off.

Having finished all his business, soaked through with the streams of
water which kept running down the leather behind his neck and his
gaiters, but in the keenest and most confident temper, Levin returned
homewards in the evening. The weather had become worse than ever towards
evening; the hail lashed the drenched mare so cruelly that she went
along sideways, shaking her head and ears; but Levin was all right under
his hood, and he looked cheerfully about him at the muddy streams
running under the wheels, at the drops hanging on every bare twig, at
the whiteness of the patch of unmelted hailstones on the planks of the
bridge, at the thick layer of still juicy, fleshy leaves that lay heaped
up about the stripped elm-tree. In spite of the gloominess of nature
around him, he felt peculiarly eager. The talks he had been having with
the peasants in the further village had shown that they were beginning
to get used to their new position. The old servant to whose hut he had
gone to get dry evidently approved of Levin’s plan, and of his own
accord proposed to enter the partnership by the purchase of cattle.

"I have only to go stubbornly on towards my aim, and I shall attain my
end," thought Levin; "and it’s something to work and take trouble for.
This is not a matter of myself individually; the question of the public
welfare comes into it. The whole system of culture, the chief element in
the condition of the people, must be completely transformed. Instead of
poverty, general prosperity and content; instead of hostility, harmony
and unity of interests. In short, a bloodless revolution, but a
revolution of the greatest magnitude, beginning in the little circle of
our district, then the province, then Russia, the whole world. Because a
just idea cannot but be fruitful. Yes, it’s an aim worth working for.
And its being me, Kostya Levin, who went to a ball in a black tie, and
was refused by the Shtcherbatskaya girl, and who was intrinsically such
a pitiful, worthless creature—that proves nothing; I feel sure Franklin
felt just as worthless, and he too had no faith in himself, thinking of
himself as a whole. That means nothing. And he too, most likely, had an
Agafea Mihalovna to whom he confided his secrets."

Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the darkness.

After dinner Levin was sitting, as he usually did, in an easy chair with
a book, and as he read he went on thinking of the journey before him in
connection with his book. Today all the significance of his book rose
before him with special distinctness, and whole periods ranged
themselves in his mind in illustration of his theories. "I must write
that down," he thought. "That ought to form a brief introduction, which
I thought unnecessary before." He got up to go to his writing table, and
Laska, lying at his feet, got up too, stretching and looking at him as
though to inquire where to go. But he had not time to write it down, for
the head peasants had come round, and Levin went out into the hall to
them.

After his levee, that is to say, giving directions about the labors of
the next day, and seeing all the peasants who had business with him,
Levin went back to his study and sat down to work.

After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought with
exceptional vividness of Kitty, her refusal, and their last meeting. He
got up and began walking about the room.

Agafea Mihalovna knew every detail of Levin’s plans for his land. Levin
often put his views before her in all their complexity, and not
uncommonly he argued with her and did not agree with her comments. But
on this occasion she entirely misinterpreted what he had said.

Agafea Mihalovna’s allusion to the very subject he had only just been
thinking about, hurt and stung him. Levin scowled, and without answering
her, he sat down again to his work, repeating to himself all that he had
been thinking of the real significance of that work. Only at intervals
he listened in the stillness to the click of Agafea Mihalovna’s needles,
and recollecting what he did not want to remember, he frowned again.

"Well, here’s visitors come to us, and you won’t be dull," said Agafea
Mihalovna, getting up and going to the door. But Levin overtook her. His
work was not going well now, and he was glad of a visitor, whoever it
might be.

Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound he knew, a
familiar cough in the hall. But he heard it indistinctly through the
sound of his own footsteps, and hoped he was mistaken. Then he caught
sight of a long, bony, familiar figure, and now it seemed there was no
possibility of mistake; and yet he still went on hoping that this tall
man taking off his fur cloak and coughing was not his brother Nikolay.

Levin loved his brother, but being with him was always a torture. Just
now, when Levin, under the influence of the thoughts that had come to
him, and Agafea Mihalovna’s hint, was in a troubled and uncertain humor,
the meeting with his brother that he had to face seemed particularly
difficult. Instead of a lively, healthy visitor, some outsider who
would, he hoped, cheer him up in his uncertain humor, he had to see his
brother, who knew him through and through, who would call forth all the
thoughts nearest his heart, would force him to show himself fully. And
that he was not disposed to do.

Angry with himself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into the hall; as
soon as he had seen his brother close, this feeling of selfish
disappointment vanished instantly and was replaced by pity. Terrible as
his brother Nikolay had been before in his emaciation and sickliness,
now he looked still more emaciated, still more wasted. He was a skeleton
covered with skin.

He stood in the hall, jerking his long thin neck, and pulling the scarf
off it, and smiled a strange and pitiful smile. When he saw that smile,
submissive and humble, Levin felt something clutching at his throat.

"Yes, yes!" answered Levin. And he felt still more frightened when,
kissing him, he felt with his lips the dryness of his brother’s skin and
saw close to him his big eyes, full of a strange light.

A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had written to his brother that
through the sale of the small part of the property, that had remained
undivided, there was a sum of about two thousand roubles to come to him
as his share.

Nikolay said that he had come now to take this money and, what was more
important, to stay a while in the old nest, to get in touch with the
earth, so as to renew his strength like the heroes of old for the work
that lay before him. In spite of his exaggerated stoop, and the
emaciation that was so striking from his height, his movements were as
rapid and abrupt as ever. Levin led him into his study.

He was in the most affectionate and good-humored mood, just as Levin
often remembered him in childhood. He even referred to Sergey Ivanovitch
without rancor. When he saw Agafea Mihalovna, he made jokes with her and
asked after the old servants. The news of the death of Parfen Denisitch
made a painful impression on him. A look of fear crossed his face, but
he regained his serenity immediately.

Levin listened and racked his brains, but could think of nothing to say.
Nikolay probably felt the same; he began questioning his brother about
his affairs; and Levin was glad to talk about himself, because then he
could speak without hypocrisy. He told his brother of his plans and his
doings.

Both of them now had only one thought—the illness of Nikolay and the
nearness of his death—which stifled all else. But neither of them dared
to speak of it, and so whatever they said—not uttering the one thought
that filled their minds—was all falsehood. Never had Levin been so glad
when the evening was over and it was time to go to bed. Never with any
outside person, never on any official visit had he been so unnatural and
false as he was that evening. And the consciousness of this
unnaturalness, and the remorse he felt at it, made him even more
unnatural. He wanted to weep over his dying, dearly loved brother, and
he had to listen and keep on talking of how he meant to live.

As the house was damp, and only one bedroom had been kept heated, Levin
put his brother to sleep in his own bedroom behind a screen.

His brother got into bed, and whether he slept or did not sleep, tossed
about like a sick man, coughed, and when he could not get his throat
clear, mumbled something. Sometimes when his breathing was painful, he
said, "Oh, my God!" Sometimes when he was choking he muttered angrily,
"Ah, the devil!" Levin could not sleep for a long while, hearing him.
His thoughts were of the most various, but the end of all his thoughts
was the same—death. Death, the inevitable end of all, for the first time
presented itself to him with irresistible force. And death, which was
here in this loved brother, groaning half asleep and from habit calling
without distinction on God and the devil, was not so remote as it had
hitherto seemed to him. It was in himself too, he felt that. If not
today, tomorrow, if not tomorrow, in thirty years, wasn’t it all the
same! And what was this inevitable death—he did not know, had never
thought about it, and what was more, had not the power, had not the
courage to think about it.

Levin felt, withdrew behind the screen, and put out the candle, but for
a long while he could not sleep. The question how to live had hardly
begun to grow a little clearer to him, when a new, insoluble question
presented itself—death.

Levin had long before made the observation that when one is
uncomfortable with people from their being excessively amenable and
meek, one is apt very soon after to find things intolerable from their
touchiness and irritability. He felt that this was how it would be with
his brother. And his brother Nikolay’s gentleness did in fact not last
out for long. The very next morning he began to be irritable, and seemed
doing his best to find fault with his brother, attacking him on his
tenderest points.

Levin felt himself to blame, and could not set things right. He felt
that if they had both not kept up appearances, but had spoken, as it is
called, from the heart—that is to say, had said only just what they were
thinking and feeling—they would simply have looked into each other’s
faces, and Konstantin could only have said, "You’re dying, you’re
dying!" and Nikolay could only have answered, "I know I’m dying, but I’m
afraid, I’m afraid, I’m afraid!" And they could have said nothing more,
if they had said only what was in their hearts. But life like that was
impossible, and so Konstantin tried to do what he had been trying to do
all his life, and never could learn to do, though, as far as he could
observe, many people knew so well how to do it, and without it there was
no living at all. He tried to say what he was not thinking, but he felt
continually that it had a ring of falsehood, that his brother detected
him in it, and was exasperated at it.

"But I tell you it’s nothing to do with it. They deny the justice of
property, of capital, of inheritance, while I do not deny this chief
stimulus." (Levin felt disgusted himself at using such expressions, but
ever since he had been engrossed by his work, he had unconsciously come
more and more frequently to use words not Russian.) "All I want is to
regulate labor."

"That, anyway," said Nikolay Levin, with an ironical smile, his eyes
flashing malignantly, "has the charm of—what’s one to call
it?—geometrical symmetry, of clearness, of definiteness. It may be a
Utopia. But if once one allows the possibility of making of all the past
a _tabula rasa_—no property, no family—then labor would organize itself.
But you gain nothing..."

Levin suddenly lost his temper at these words, because at the bottom of
his heart he was afraid that it was true—true that he was trying to hold
the balance even between communism and the familiar forms, and that this
was hardly possible.

"Oh, all right, that’s what you think—and let me alone!" answered Levin,
feeling the muscles of his left cheek twitching uncontrollably.

In spite of all Levin’s efforts to soothe his brother afterwards,
Nikolay would listen to nothing he said, declaring that it was better to
part, and Konstantin saw that it simply was that life was unbearable to
him.

"Anyway, don’t remember evil against me, Kostya!" and his voice
quivered. These were the only words that had been spoken sincerely
between them. Levin knew that those words meant, "You see, and you know,
that I’m in a bad way, and maybe we shall not see each other again."
Levin knew this, and the tears gushed from his eyes. He kissed his
brother once more, but he could not speak, and knew not what to say.

Three days after his brother’s departure, Levin too set off for his
foreign tour. Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in the
railway train, Levin greatly astonished him by his depression.

Levin said what he had genuinely been thinking of late. He saw nothing
but death or the advance towards death in everything. But his cherished
scheme only engrossed him the more. Life had to be got through somehow
till death did come. Darkness had fallen upon everything for him; but
just because of this darkness he felt that the one guiding clue in the
darkness was his work, and he clutched it and clung to it with all his
strength.

The next day was Sunday. Stepan Arkadyevitch went to the Grand Theater
to a rehearsal of the ballet, and gave Masha Tchibisova, a pretty
dancing-girl whom he had just taken under his protection, the coral
necklace he had promised her the evening before, and behind the scenes
in the dim daylight of the theater, managed to kiss her pretty little
face, radiant over her present. Besides the gift of the necklace he
wanted to arrange with her about meeting after the ballet. After
explaining that he could not come at the beginning of the ballet, he
promised he would come for the last act and take her to supper. From the
theater Stepan Arkadyevitch drove to Ohotny Row, selected himself the
fish and asparagus for dinner, and by twelve o’clock was at Dussot’s,
where he had to see three people, luckily all staying at the same hotel:
Levin, who had recently come back from abroad and was staying there; the
new head of his department, who had just been promoted to that position,
and had come on a tour of revision to Moscow; and his brother-in-law,
Karenin, whom he must see, so as to be sure of bringing him to dinner.

Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still better he liked to give a
dinner, small, but very choice, both as regards the food and drink and
as regards the selection of guests. He particularly liked the program of
that day’s dinner. There would be fresh perch, asparagus, and _la pièce
de resistance_—first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef, and wines to
suit: so much for the eating and drinking. Kitty and Levin would be of
the party, and that this might not be obtrusively evident, there would
be a girl cousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and _la pièce de
resistance_ among the guests—Sergey Koznishev and Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch was a Moscow man, and a philosopher; Alexey
Alexandrovitch a Petersburger, and a practical politician. He was
asking, too, the well-known eccentric enthusiast, Pestsov, a liberal, a
great talker, a musician, an historian, and the most delightfully
youthful person of fifty, who would be a sauce or garnish for Koznishev
and Karenin. He would provoke them and set them off.

"Good-day, Vassily," he said, walking into the corridor with his hat
cocked on one side, and addressing a footman he knew; "why, you’ve let
your whiskers grow! Levin, number seven, eh? Take me up, please. And
find out whether Count Anitchkin" (this was the new head) "is
receiving."

Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the middle of the room,
measuring a fresh bearskin, when Stepan Arkadyevitch went in.

"Come, take off your coat and stay a little," said Levin, taking his
hat.

"No, I haven’t time; I’ve only looked in for a tiny second," answered
Stepan Arkadyevitch. He threw open his coat, but afterwards did take it
off, and sat on for a whole hour, talking to Levin about hunting and the
most intimate subjects.

Stepan Arkadyevitch listened attentively to Levin.

"Well, what of it? I’ve not given up thinking of death," said Levin.
"It’s true that it’s high time I was dead; and that all this is
nonsense. It’s the truth I’m telling you. I do value my idea and my work
awfully; but in reality only consider this: all this world of ours is
nothing but a speck of mildew, which has grown up on a tiny planet. And
for us to suppose we can have something great—ideas, work—it’s all dust
and ashes."

Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled a subtle affectionate smile as he listened to
Levin.

"No; all the same, what’s fine in life is..." Levin hesitated—"oh, I
don’t know. All I know is that we shall soon be dead."

"Oh, no, stay a bit!" said Levin, keeping him. "Now, when shall we see
each other again? I’m going tomorrow."

"You don’t mean to say he’s here?" said Levin, and he wanted to inquire
about Kitty. He had heard at the beginning of the winter that she was at
Petersburg with her sister, the wife of the diplomat, and he did not
know whether she had come back or not; but he changed his mind and did
not ask. "Whether she’s coming or not, I don’t care," he said to
himself.

Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were not going well in
the drawing-room without him. Darya Alexandrovna, in her best gray silk
gown, obviously worried about the children, who were to have their
dinner by themselves in the nursery, and by her husband’s absence, was
not equal to the task of making the party mix without him. All were
sitting like so many priests’ wives on a visit (so the old prince
expressed it), obviously wondering why they were there, and pumping up
remarks simply to avoid being silent. Turovtsin—good, simple man—felt
unmistakably a fish out of water, and the smile with which his thick
lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitch said, as plainly as words: "Well, old
boy, you have popped me down in a learned set! A drinking party now, or
the _Château des Fleurs_, would be more in my line!" The old prince sat
in silence, his bright little eyes watching Karenin from one side, and
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw that he had already formed a phrase to sum up
that politician of whom guests were invited to partake as though he were
a sturgeon. Kitty was looking at the door, calling up all her energies
to keep her from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin. Young
Shtcherbatsky, who had not been introduced to Karenin, was trying to
look as though he were not in the least conscious of it. Karenin himself
had followed the Petersburg fashion for a dinner with ladies and was
wearing evening dress and a white tie. Stepan Arkadyevitch saw by his
face that he had come simply to keep his promise, and was performing a
disagreeable duty in being present at this gathering. He was indeed the
person chiefly responsible for the chill benumbing all the guests before
Stepan Arkadyevitch came in.

On entering the drawing room Stepan Arkadyevitch apologized, explaining
that he had been detained by that prince, who was always the scapegoat
for all his absences and unpunctualities, and in one moment he had made
all the guests acquainted with each other, and, bringing together Alexey
Alexandrovitch and Sergey Koznishev, started them on a discussion of the
Russification of Poland, into which they immediately plunged with
Pestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on the shoulder, he whispered something
comic in his ear, and set him down by his wife and the old prince. Then
he told Kitty she was looking very pretty that evening, and presented
Shtcherbatsky to Karenin. In a moment he had so kneaded together the
social dough that the drawing room became very lively, and there was a
merry buzz of voices. Konstantin Levin was the only person who had not
arrived. But this was so much the better, as going into the dining room,
Stepan Arkadyevitch found to his horror that the port and sherry had
been procured from Deprè, and not from Levy, and, directing that the
coachman should be sent off as speedily as possible to Levy’s, he was
going back to the drawing room.

In the dining room he was met by Konstantin Levin.

"Have you a lot of people? Who’s here?" asked Levin, unable to help
blushing, as he knocked the snow off his cap with his glove.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all his liberal views, was well aware that to
meet Karenin was sure to be felt a flattering distinction, and so
treated his best friends to this honor. But at that instant Konstantin
Levin was not in a condition to feel all the gratification of making
such an acquaintance. He had not seen Kitty since that memorable evening
when he met Vronsky, not counting, that is, the moment when he had had a
glimpse of her on the highroad. He had known at the bottom of his heart
that he would see her here today. But to keep his thoughts free, he had
tried to persuade himself that he did not know it. Now when he heard
that she was here, he was suddenly conscious of such delight, and at the
same time of such dread, that his breath failed him and he could not
utter what he wanted to say.

"You’ve not seen me, but I’ve seen you," said Levin, with a radiant
smile of happiness. "I saw you when you were driving from the railway
station to Ergushovo."

"You were driving to Ergushovo," said Levin, feeling as if he would sob
with the rapture that was flooding his heart. "And how dared I associate
a thought of anything not innocent with this touching creature? And,
yes, I do believe it’s true what Darya Alexandrovna told me," he
thought.

"Very glad to meet you again," said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly,
shaking hands with Levin.

"We spent three hours together in the train," said Levin smiling, "but
got out, just as in a masquerade, quite mystified—at least I was."

"This cheese is not bad. Shall I give you some?" said the master of the
house. "Why, have you been going in for gymnastics again?" he asked
Levin, pinching his muscle with his left hand. Levin smiled, bent his
arm, and under Stepan Arkadyevitch’s fingers the muscles swelled up like
a sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron, through the fine cloth of the
coat.

Levin smiled.

"I saw you were in uncertainty about me," said Levin, smiling
good-naturedly, "but I made haste to plunge into intellectual
conversation to smooth over the defects of my attire." Sergey
Ivanovitch, while he kept up a conversation with their hostess, had one
ear for his brother, and he glanced askance at him. "What is the matter
with him today? Why such a conquering hero?" he thought. He did not know
that Levin was feeling as though he had grown wings. Levin knew she was
listening to his words and that she was glad to listen to him. And this
was the only thing that interested him. Not in that room only, but in
the whole world, there existed for him only himself, with enormously
increased importance and dignity in his own eyes, and she. He felt
himself on a pinnacle that made him giddy, and far away down below were
all those nice excellent Karenins, Oblonskys, and all the world.

Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as though
there were no other places left, Stepan Arkadyevitch put Levin and Kitty
side by side.

"Oh, you may as well sit there," he said to Levin.

Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin. At first,
when they were talking of the influence that one people has on another,
there rose to Levin’s mind what he had to say on the subject. But these
ideas, once of such importance in his eyes, seemed to come into his
brain as in a dream, and had now not the slightest interest for him. It
even struck him as strange that they should be so eager to talk of what
was of no use to anyone. Kitty, too, should, one would have supposed,
have been interested in what they were saying of the rights and
education of women. How often she had mused on the subject, thinking of
her friend abroad, Varenka, of her painful state of dependence, how
often she had wondered about herself what would become of her if she did
not marry, and how often she had argued with her sister about it! But it
did not interest her at all. She and Levin had a conversation of their
own, yet not a conversation, but some sort of mysterious communication,
which brought them every moment nearer, and stirred in both a sense of
glad terror before the unknown into which they were entering.

At first Levin, in answer to Kitty’s question how he could have seen her
last year in the carriage, told her how he had been coming home from the
mowing along the highroad and had met her.

"How nicely Turovtsin laughs!" said Levin, admiring his moist eyes and
shaking chest.

"Yes, it was wonderful, noble!" said Dolly, glancing towards Turovtsin,
who had become aware they were talking of him, and smiling gently to
him. Levin glanced once more at Turovtsin, and wondered how it was he
had not realized all this man’s goodness before.

When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kitty into
the drawing room; but he was afraid she might dislike this, as too
obviously paying her attention. He remained in the little ring of men,
taking part in the general conversation, and without looking at Kitty,
he was aware of her movements, her looks, and the place where she was in
the drawing room.

He did at once, and without the smallest effort, keep the promise he had
made her—always to think well of all men, and to like everyone always.
The conversation fell on the village commune, in which Pestsov saw a
sort of special principle, called by him the choral principle. Levin did
not agree with Pestsov, nor with his brother, who had a special attitude
of his own, both admitting and not admitting the significance of the
Russian commune. But he talked to them, simply trying to reconcile and
soften their differences. He was not in the least interested in what he
said himself, and even less so in what they said; all he wanted was that
they and everyone should be happy and contented. He knew now the one
thing of importance; and that one thing was at first there, in the
drawing room, and then began moving across and came to a standstill at
the door. Without turning round he felt the eyes fixed on him, and the
smile, and he could not help turning round. She was standing in the
doorway with Shtcherbatsky, looking at him.

"Yes; that’s true," said Levin; "it generally happens that one argues
warmly simply because one can’t make out what one’s opponent wants to
prove."

Levin had often noticed in discussions between the most intelligent
people that after enormous efforts, and an enormous expenditure of
logical subtleties and words, the disputants finally arrived at being
aware that what they had so long been struggling to prove to one another
had long ago, from the beginning of the argument, been known to both,
but that they liked different things, and would not define what they
liked for fear of its being attacked. He had often had the experience of
suddenly in a discussion grasping what it was his opponent liked and at
once liking it too, and immediately he found himself agreeing, and then
all arguments fell away as useless. Sometimes, too, he had experienced
the opposite, expressing at last what he liked himself, which he was
devising arguments to defend, and, chancing to express it well and
genuinely, he had found his opponent at once agreeing and ceasing to
dispute his position. He tried to say this.

She had completely guessed and expressed his badly expressed idea. Levin
smiled joyfully; he was struck by this transition from the confused,
verbose discussion with Pestsov and his brother to this laconic, clear,
almost wordless communication of the most complex ideas.

They began again on the subject that had been started at dinner—the
liberty and occupations of women. Levin was of the opinion of Darya
Alexandrovna that a girl who did not marry should find a woman’s duties
in a family. He supported this view by the fact that no family can get
on without women to help; that in every family, poor or rich, there are
and must be nurses, either relations or hired.

Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by her
conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch when she caught sight of the two
figures: Kitty with the chalk in her hand, with a shy and happy smile
looking upwards at Levin, and his handsome figure bending over the table
with glowing eyes fastened one minute on the table and the next on her.
He was suddenly radiant: he had understood. It meant, "Then I could not
answer differently."

Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.

When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt such uneasiness
without her, and such an impatient longing to get as quickly, as quickly
as possible, to tomorrow morning, when he would see her again and be
plighted to her forever, that he felt afraid, as though of death, of
those fourteen hours that he had to get through without her. It was
essential for him to be with someone to talk to, so as not to be left
alone, to kill time. Stepan Arkadyevitch would have been the companion
most congenial to him, but he was going out, he said, to a _soirée_, in
reality to the ballet. Levin only had time to tell him he was happy, and
that he loved him, and would never, never forget what he had done for
him. The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed Levin that he
comprehended that feeling fittingly.

"Oh, so it’s not time to die yet?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressing
Levin’s hand with emotion.

"N-n-no!" said Levin.

Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him, gave him a sort of
congratulation, saying, "How glad I am you have met Kitty again! One
must value old friends." Levin did not like these words of Darya
Alexandrovna’s. She could not understand how lofty and beyond her it all
was, and she ought not to have dared to allude to it. Levin said
good-bye to them, but, not to be left alone, he attached himself to his
brother.

"With me? Happiness is the matter with me!" said Levin, letting down the
window of the carriage they were driving in. "You don’t mind?—it’s so
stifling. It’s happiness is the matter with me! Why is it you have never
married?"

"Don’t say it! don’t say it!" shouted Levin, clutching at the collar of
his fur coat with both hands, and muffling him up in it. "She’s a nice
girl" were such simple, humble words, so out of harmony with his
feeling.

"That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing more! Nothing, nothing,
silence," said Levin, and muffling him once more in his fur coat, he
added: "I do like you so! Well, is it possible for me to be present at
the meeting?"

"What is your discussion about today?" asked Levin, never ceasing
smiling.

They arrived at the meeting. Levin heard the secretary hesitatingly read
the minutes which he obviously did not himself understand; but Levin saw
from this secretary’s face what a good, nice, kind-hearted person he
was. This was evident from his confusion and embarrassment in reading
the minutes. Then the discussion began. They were disputing about the
misappropriation of certain sums and the laying of certain pipes, and
Sergey Ivanovitch was very cutting to two members, and said something at
great length with an air of triumph; and another member, scribbling
something on a bit of paper, began timidly at first, but afterwards
answered him very viciously and delightfully. And then Sviazhsky (he was
there too) said something too, very handsomely and nobly. Levin listened
to them, and saw clearly that these missing sums and these pipes were
not anything real, and that they were not at all angry, but were all the
nicest, kindest people, and everything was as happy and charming as
possible among them. They did no harm to anyone, and were all enjoying
it. What struck Levin was that he could see through them all today, and
from little, almost imperceptible signs knew the soul of each, and saw
distinctly that they were all good at heart. And Levin himself in
particular they were all extremely fond of that day. That was evident
from the way they spoke to him, from the friendly, affectionate way even
those he did not know looked at him.

Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come round to tea with
him. Levin was utterly at a loss to comprehend or recall what it was he
had disliked in Sviazhsky, what he had failed to find in him. He was a
clever and wonderfully good-hearted man.

Sviazhsky questioned him about his improvements on his estate,
presupposing, as he always did, that there was no possibility of doing
anything not done already in Europe, and now this did not in the least
annoy Levin. On the contrary, he felt that Sviazhsky was right, that the
whole business was of little value, and he saw the wonderful softness
and consideration with which Sviazhsky avoided fully expressing his
correct view. The ladies of the Sviazhsky household were particularly
delightful. It seemed to Levin that they knew all about it already and
sympathized with him, saying nothing merely from delicacy. He stayed
with them one hour, two, three, talking of all sorts of subjects but the
one thing that filled his heart, and did not observe that he was boring
them dreadfully, and that it was long past their bedtime.

Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at the
strange humor his friend was in. It was past one o’clock. Levin went
back to his hotel, and was dismayed at the thought that all alone now
with his impatience he had ten hours still left to get through. The
servant, whose turn it was to be up all night, lighted his candles, and
would have gone away, but Levin stopped him. This servant, Yegor, whom
Levin had noticed before, struck him as a very intelligent, excellent,
and, above all, good-hearted man.

Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in his opinion, in marriage
the great thing was love, and that with love one would always be happy,
for happiness rests only on oneself. Yegor listened attentively, and
obviously quite took in Levin’s idea, but by way of assent to it he
enunciated, greatly to Levin’s surprise, the observation that when he
had lived with good masters he had always been satisfied with his
masters, and now was perfectly satisfied with his employer, though he
was a Frenchman.

"Wonderfully good-hearted fellow!" thought Levin.

And Levin saw that Yegor too was in an excited state and intending to
express all his most heartfelt emotions.

"My life, too, has been a wonderful one. From a child up..." he was
beginning with flashing eyes, apparently catching Levin’s enthusiasm,
just as people catch yawning.

But at that moment a ring was heard. Yegor departed, and Levin was left
alone. He had eaten scarcely anything at dinner, had refused tea and
supper at Sviazhsky’s, but he was incapable of thinking of supper. He
had not slept the previous night, but was incapable of thinking of sleep
either. His room was cold, but he was oppressed by heat. He opened both
the movable panes in his window and sat down to the table opposite the
open panes. Over the snow-covered roofs could be seen a decorated cross
with chains, and above it the rising triangle of Charles’s Wain with the
yellowish light of Capella. He gazed at the cross, then at the stars,
drank in the fresh freezing air that flowed evenly into the room, and
followed as though in a dream the images and memories that rose in his
imagination. At four o’clock he heard steps in the passage and peeped
out at the door. It was the gambler Myaskin, whom he knew, coming from
the club. He walked gloomily, frowning and coughing. "Poor, unlucky
fellow!" thought Levin, and tears came into his eyes from love and pity
for this man. He would have talked with him, and tried to comfort him,
but remembering that he had nothing but his shirt on, he changed his
mind and sat down again at the open pane to bathe in the cold air and
gaze at the exquisite lines of the cross, silent, but full of meaning
for him, and the mounting lurid yellow star. At seven o’clock there was
a noise of people polishing the floors, and bells ringing in some
servants’ department, and Levin felt that he was beginning to get
frozen. He closed the pane, washed, dressed, and went out into the
street.

The streets were still empty. Levin went to the house of the
Shtcherbatskys. The visitors’ doors were closed and everything was
asleep. He walked back, went into his room again, and asked for coffee.
The day servant, not Yegor this time, brought it to him. Levin would
have entered into conversation with him, but a bell rang for the
servant, and he went out. Levin tried to drink coffee and put some roll
in his mouth, but his mouth was quite at a loss what to do with the
roll. Levin, rejecting the roll, put on his coat and went out again for
a walk. It was nine o’clock when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ steps
the second time. In the house they were only just up, and the cook came
out to go marketing. He had to get through at least two hours more.

All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly unconsciously, and felt
perfectly lifted out of the conditions of material life. He had eaten
nothing for a whole day, he had not slept for two nights, had spent
several hours undressed in the frozen air, and felt not simply fresher
and stronger than ever, but felt utterly independent of his body; he
moved without muscular effort, and felt as if he could do anything. He
was convinced he could fly upwards or lift the corner of the house, if
need be. He spent the remainder of the time in the street, incessantly
looking at his watch and gazing about him.

And what he saw then, he never saw again after. The children especially
going to school, the bluish doves flying down from the roofs to the
pavement, and the little loaves covered with flour, thrust out by an
unseen hand, touched him. Those loaves, those doves, and those two boys
were not earthly creatures. It all happened at the same time: a boy ran
towards a dove and glanced smiling at Levin; the dove, with a whir of
her wings, darted away, flashing in the sun, amid grains of snow that
quivered in the air, while from a little window there came a smell of
fresh-baked bread, and the loaves were put out. All of this together was
so extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed and cried with delight. Going
a long way round by Gazetny Place and Kislovka, he went back again to
the hotel, and putting his watch before him, he sat down to wait for
twelve o’clock. In the next room they were talking about some sort of
machines, and swindling, and coughing their morning coughs. They did not
realize that the hand was near twelve. The hand reached it. Levin went
out onto the steps. The sledge-drivers clearly knew all about it. They
crowded round Levin with happy faces, quarreling among themselves, and
offering their services. Trying not to offend the other sledge drivers,
and promising to drive with them too, Levin took one and told him to
drive to the Shtcherbatskys’. The sledge-driver was splendid in a white
shirt-collar sticking out over his overcoat and into his strong,
full-blooded red neck. The sledge was high and comfortable, and
altogether such a one as Levin never drove in after, and the horse was a
good one, and tried to gallop but didn’t seem to move. The driver knew
the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and drew up at the entrance with a curve of
his arm and a "Wo!" especially indicative of respect for his fare. The
Shtcherbatskys’ hall-porter certainly knew all about it. This was
evident from the smile in his eyes and the way he said:

Not only he knew all about it, but he was unmistakably delighted and
making efforts to conceal his joy. Looking into his kindly old eyes,
Levin realized even something new in his happiness.

"Pray walk in! Leave it here," said he, smiling, as Levin would have
come back to take his hat. That meant something.

"The princess ... the prince ... the young princess..." said Levin.

The first person he saw was Mademoiselle Linon. She walked across the
room, and her ringlets and her face were beaming. He had only just
spoken to her, when suddenly he heard the rustle of a skirt at the door,
and Mademoiselle Linon vanished from Levin’s eyes, and a joyful terror
came over him at the nearness of his happiness. Mademoiselle Linon was
in great haste, and leaving him, went out at the other door. Directly
she had gone out, swift, swift light steps sounded on the parquet, and
his bliss, his life, himself—what was best in himself, what he had so
long sought and longed for—was quickly, so quickly approaching him. She
did not walk, but seemed, by some unseen force, to float to him. He saw
nothing but her clear, truthful eyes, frightened by the same bliss of
love that flooded his heart. Those eyes were shining nearer and nearer,
blinding him with their light of love. She stopped still close to him,
touching him. Her hands rose and dropped onto his shoulders.

Not letting go his hands, she went into the drawing room. The princess,
seeing them, breathed quickly, and immediately began to cry and then
immediately began to laugh, and with a vigorous step Levin had not
expected, ran up to him, and hugging his head, kissed him, wetting his
cheeks with her tears.

"You’ve not been long settling things," said the old prince, trying to
seem unmoved; but Levin noticed that his eyes were wet when he turned to
him.

"I’ve long, always wished for this!" said the prince, taking Levin by
the arm and drawing him towards himself. "Even when this little
feather-head fancied..."

And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man, till then
so little known to him, when he saw how slowly and tenderly Kitty kissed
his muscular hand.

"Here he is," said the old prince, pointing to Levin—"he’s the principal
person in the matter."

"When?" said Levin blushing. "Tomorrow; If you ask me, I should say, the
benediction today and the wedding tomorrow."

"Will there really be a trousseau and all that?" Levin thought with
horror. "But can the trousseau and the benediction and all that—can it
spoil my happiness? Nothing can spoil it!" He glanced at Kitty, and
noticed that she was not in the least, not in the very least, disturbed
by the idea of the trousseau. "Then it must be all right," he thought.

The princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and would have gone
away, but he kept her, embraced her, and, tenderly as a young lover,
kissed her several times, smiling. The old people were obviously muddled
for a moment, and did not quite know whether it was they who were in
love again or their daughter. When the prince and the princess had gone,
Levin went up to his betrothed and took her hand. He was self-possessed
now and could speak, and he had a great deal he wanted to tell her. But
he said not at all what he had to say.

Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who with an
affected but tender smile came to congratulate her favorite pupil.
Before she had gone, the servants came in with their congratulations.
Then relations arrived, and there began that state of blissful absurdity
from which Levin did not emerge till the day after his wedding. Levin
was in a continual state of awkwardness and discomfort, but the
intensity of his happiness went on all the while increasing. He felt
continually that a great deal was being expected of him—what, he did not
know; and he did everything he was told, and it all gave him happiness.
He had thought his engagement would have nothing about it like others,
that the ordinary conditions of engaged couples would spoil his special
happiness; but it ended in his doing exactly as other people did, and
his happiness being only increased thereby and becoming more and more
special, more and more unlike anything that had ever happened.

"Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat," said Mademoiselle Linon—and Levin
drove off to buy sweetmeats.

And at the confectioner’s, and at Fomin’s, and at Foulde’s he saw that
he was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and prided
themselves on his happiness, just as every one whom he had to do with
during those days. What was extraordinary was that everyone not only
liked him, but even people previously unsympathetic, cold, and callous,
were enthusiastic over him, gave way to him in everything, treated his
feeling with tenderness and delicacy, and shared his conviction that he
was the happiest man in the world because his betrothed was beyond
perfection. Kitty too felt the same thing. When Countess Nordston
ventured to hint that she had hoped for something better, Kitty was so
angry and proved so conclusively that nothing in the world could be
better than Levin, that Countess Nordston had to admit it, and in
Kitty’s presence never met Levin without a smile of ecstatic admiration.

Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his diary. He knew that
between him and her there could not be, and should not be, secrets, and
so he had decided that so it must be. But he had not realized what an
effect it would have on her, he had not put himself in her place. It was
only when the same evening he came to their house before the theater,
went into her room and saw her tear-stained, pitiful, sweet face,
miserable with suffering he had caused and nothing could undo, he felt
the abyss that separated his shameful past from her dovelike purity, and
was appalled at what he had done.

Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the question for
the wedding to take place before Lent, just five weeks off, since not
half the trousseau could possibly be ready by that time. But she could
not but agree with Levin that to fix it for after Lent would be putting
it off too late, as an old aunt of Prince Shtcherbatsky’s was seriously
ill and might die, and then the mourning would delay the wedding still
longer. And therefore, deciding to divide the trousseau into two parts—a
larger and smaller trousseau—the princess consented to have the wedding
before Lent. She determined that she would get the smaller part of the
trousseau all ready now, and the larger part should be made later, and
she was much vexed with Levin because he was incapable of giving her a
serious answer to the question whether he agreed to this arrangement or
not. The arrangement was the more suitable as, immediately after the
wedding, the young people were to go to the country, where the more
important part of the trousseau would not be wanted.

Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it seemed
to him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and sole aim of
all existence, and that he need not now think or care about anything,
that everything was being done and would be done for him by others. He
had not even plans and aims for the future, he left its arrangement to
others, knowing that everything would be delightful. His brother Sergey
Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided him in doing
what he had to do. All he did was to agree entirely with everything
suggested to him. His brother raised money for him, the princess advised
him to leave Moscow after the wedding. Stepan Arkadyevitch advised him
to go abroad. He agreed to everything. "Do what you choose, if it amuses
you. I’m happy, and my happiness can be no greater and no less for
anything you do," he thought. When he told Kitty of Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s advice that they should go abroad, he was much surprised
that she did not agree to this, and had some definite requirements of
her own in regard to their future. She knew Levin had work he loved in
the country. She did not, as he saw, understand this work, she did not
even care to understand it. But that did not prevent her from regarding
it as a matter of great importance. And then she knew their home would
be in the country, and she wanted to go, not abroad where she was not
going to live, but to the place where their home would be. This
definitely expressed purpose astonished Levin. But since he did not care
either way, he immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it were
his duty, to go down to the country and to arrange everything there to
the best of his ability with the taste of which he had so much.

"_Aïe, aïe, aïe!_" cried Levin. "Why, I believe it’s nine years since
I’ve taken the sacrament! I never thought of it."

Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go to
confession. To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects the beliefs of
others, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present at and take part
in church ceremonies. At this moment, in his present softened state of
feeling, sensitive to everything, this inevitable act of hypocrisy was
not merely painful to Levin, it seemed to him utterly impossible. Now,
in the heyday of his highest glory, his fullest flower, he would have to
be a liar or a scoffer. He felt incapable of being either. But though he
repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to the
possibility of obtaining a certificate without actually communicating,
Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of the question.

Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in himself his
youthful recollections of the intense religious emotion he had passed
through between the ages of sixteen and seventeen.

But he was at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to him. He
attempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having no sort of
meaning, like the custom of paying calls. But he felt that he could not
do that either. Levin found himself, like the majority of his
contemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard to religion. Believe
he could not, and at the same time he had no firm conviction that it was
all wrong. And consequently, not being able to believe in the
significance of what he was doing nor to regard it with indifference as
an empty formality, during the whole period of preparing for the
sacrament he was conscious of a feeling of discomfort and shame at doing
what he did not himself understand, and what, as an inner voice told
him, was therefore false and wrong.

There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old women, and
the church officials. A young deacon, whose long back showed in two
distinct halves through his thin undercassock, met him, and at once
going to a little table at the wall read the exhortation. During the
reading, especially at the frequent and rapid repetition of the same
words, "Lord, have mercy on us!" which resounded with an echo, Levin
felt that thought was shut and sealed up, and that it must not be
touched or stirred now or confusion would be the result; and so standing
behind the deacon he went on thinking of his own affairs, neither
listening nor examining what was said. "It’s wonderful what expression
there is in her hand," he thought, remembering how they had been sitting
the day before at a corner table. They had nothing to talk about, as was
almost always the case at this time, and laying her hand on the table
she kept opening and shutting it, and laughed herself as she watched her
action. He remembered how he had kissed it and then had examined the
lines on the pink palm. "Have mercy on us again!" thought Levin,
crossing himself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring of the
deacon’s back bowing before him. "She took my hand then and examined the
lines ‘You’ve got a splendid hand,’ she said." And he looked at his own
hand and the short hand of the deacon. "Yes, now it will soon be over,"
he thought. "No, it seems to be beginning again," he thought, listening
to the prayers. "No, it’s just ending: there he is bowing down to the
ground. That’s always at the end."

The deacon’s hand in a plush cuff accepted a three-rouble note
unobtrusively, and the deacon said he would put it down in the register,
and his new boots creaking jauntily over the flagstones of the empty
church, he went to the altar. A moment later he peeped out thence and
beckoned to Levin. Thought, till then locked up, began to stir in
Levin’s head, but he made haste to drive it away. "It will come right
somehow," he thought, and went towards the altar-rails. He went up the
steps, and turning to the right saw the priest. The priest, a little old
man with a scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured eyes, was
standing at the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a missal. With a
slight bow to Levin he began immediately reading prayers in the official
voice. When he had finished them he bowed down to the ground and turned,
facing Levin.

"Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession," he said,
pointing to the crucifix. "Do you believe in all the doctrines of the
Holy Apostolic Church?" the priest went on, turning his eyes away from
Levin’s face and folding his hands under his stole.

"I have doubted, I doubt everything," said Levin in a voice that jarred
on himself, and he ceased speaking.

"I doubt of everything. I sometimes even have doubts of the existence of
God," Levin could not help saying, and he was horrified at the
impropriety of what he was saying. But Levin’s words did not, it seemed,
make much impression on the priest.

Levin did not speak.

"What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold His creation?"
the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon. "Who has decked the
heavenly firmament with its lights? Who has clothed the earth in its
beauty? How explain it without the Creator?" he said, looking
inquiringly at Levin.

Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical
discussion with the priest, and so he said in reply merely what was a
direct answer to the question.

"I don’t understand it at all," said Levin, blushing, and feeling that
his words were stupid, and that they could not be anything but stupid in
such a position.

"Yes," answered Levin, blushing for the priest. "What does he want to
ask me about this at confession for?" he thought.

"You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless you with
offspring. Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give your babes if you
do not overcome the temptation of the devil, enticing you to
infidelity?" he said, with gentle reproachfulness. "If you love your
child as a good father, you will not desire only wealth, luxury, honor
for your infant; you will be anxious for his salvation, his spiritual
enlightenment with the light of truth. Eh? What answer will you make him
when the innocent babe asks you: ‘Papa! who made all that enchants me in
this world—the earth, the waters, the sun, the flowers, the grass?’ Can
you say to him: ‘I don’t know’? You cannot but know, since the Lord God
in His infinite mercy has revealed it to us. Or your child will ask you:
‘What awaits me in the life beyond the tomb?’ What will you say to him
when you know nothing? How will you answer him? Will you leave him to
the allurements of the world and the devil? That’s not right," he said,
and he stopped, putting his head on one side and looking at Levin with
his kindly, gentle eyes.

Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to enter
upon a discussion with the priest, but because, so far, no one had ever
asked him such questions, and when his babes did ask him those
questions, it would be time enough to think about answering them.

On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief at the
awkward position being over and having been got through without his
having to tell a lie. Apart from this, there remained a vague memory
that what the kind, nice old fellow had said had not been at all so
stupid as he had fancied at first, and that there was something in it
that must be cleared up.

"Of course, not now," thought Levin, "but some day later on." Levin felt
more than ever now that there was something not clear and not clean in
his soul, and that, in regard to religion, he was in the same position
which he perceived so clearly and disliked in others, and for which he
blamed his friend Sviazhsky.

Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly’s, and was in very
high spirits. To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the state of excitement
in which he found himself, he said that he was happy like a dog being
trained to jump through a hoop, who, having at last caught the idea, and
done what was required of him, whines and wags its tail, and jumps up to
the table and the windows in its delight.

On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the princess
and Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all the customs),
Levin did not see his betrothed, and dined at his hotel with three
bachelor friends, casually brought together at his rooms. These were
Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university friend, now professor of
natural science, whom Levin had met in the street and insisted on taking
home with him, and Tchirikov, his best man, a Moscow conciliation-board
judge, Levin’s companion in his bear-hunts. The dinner was a very merry
one: Sergey Ivanovitch was in his happiest mood, and was much amused by
Katavasov’s originality. Katavasov, feeling his originality was
appreciated and understood, made the most of it. Tchirikov always gave a
lively and good-humored support to conversation of any sort.

"How happy I shall be when I hear that you’re in love!" said Levin.
"Please invite me to the wedding."

"Yes, with a cuttlefish! You know," Levin turned to his brother, "Mihail
Semyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs of the..."

Levin smiled. The picture of his wife not letting him go was so pleasant
that he was ready to renounce the delights of looking upon bears
forever.

Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that there
could be something delightful apart from her, and so said nothing.

"Well, now, on my honor," said Levin, smiling, "I can’t find in my heart
that feeling of regret for my freedom."

When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these bachelor
friends, Levin asked himself: had he in his heart that regret for his
freedom of which they had spoken? He smiled at the question. "Freedom!
What is freedom for? Happiness is only in loving and wishing her wishes,
thinking her thoughts, that is to say, not freedom at all—that’s
happiness!"

When the princess came into the room five minutes later, she found them
completely reconciled. Kitty had not simply assured him that she loved
him, but had gone so far—in answer to his question, what she loved him
for—as to explain what for. She told him that she loved him because she
understood him completely, because she knew what he would like, and
because everything he liked was good. And this seemed to him perfectly
clear. When the princess came to them, they were sitting side by side on
the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty’s wanting to
give Dunyasha the brown dress she had been wearing when Levin proposed
to her, while he insisted that that dress must never be given away, but
Dunyasha must have the blue one.

Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to his hotel. His
brother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, all in full dress,
were waiting for him to bless him with the holy picture. There was no
time to lose. Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to fetch her
curled and pomaded son, who was to carry the holy pictures after the
bride. Then a carriage had to be sent for the best man, and another that
would take Sergey Ivanovitch away would have to be sent back....
Altogether there were a great many most complicated matters to be
considered and arranged. One thing was unmistakable, that there must be
no delay, as it was already half-past six.

Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the holy
picture. Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn pose beside his
wife, took the holy picture, and telling Levin to bow down to the
ground, he blessed him with his kindly, ironical smile, and kissed him
three times; Darya Alexandrovna did the same, and immediately was in a
hurry to get off, and again plunged into the intricate question of the
destinations of the various carriages.

"Yes," answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out his clothes for him
to dress.

Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and waistcoat,
was walking to and fro in his room at the hotel, continually putting his
head out of the door and looking up and down the corridor. But in the
corridor there was no sign of the person he was looking for and he came
back in despair, and frantically waving his hands addressed Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who was smoking serenely.

"No, what is to be done!" said Levin, with smothered fury. "And these
fools of open waistcoats! Out of the question!" he said, looking at the
crumpled front of his shirt. "And what if the things have been taken on
to the railway station!" he roared in desperation.

The point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma, his
old servant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and everything that
was wanted.

"But the shirt!" cried Levin.

Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not looking
at his watch for fear of aggravating his sufferings.

"They’ve come!" "Here he is!" "Which one?" "Rather young, eh?" "Why, my
dear soul, she looks more dead than alive!" were the comments in the
crowd, when Levin, meeting his bride in the entrance, walked with her
into the church.

Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the delay, and the guests
were whispering it with smiles to one another. Levin saw nothing and no
one; he did not take his eyes off his bride.

Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was not
nearly so pretty on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did not think
so. He looked at her hair done up high, with the long white veil and
white flowers and the high, stand-up, scalloped collar, that in such a
maidenly fashion hid her long neck at the sides and only showed it in
front, her strikingly slender figure, and it seemed to him that she
looked better than ever—not because these flowers, this veil, this gown
from Paris added anything to her beauty; but because, in spite of the
elaborate sumptuousness of her attire, the expression of her sweet face,
of her eyes, of her lips was still her own characteristic expression of
guileless truthfulness.

"Yes, yes!" answered Levin, without an idea of what they were talking
about.

Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.

"Oh, I’m very glad. The question’s decided!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling. "How silly men are, though, in this position," he said to
Tchirikov, when Levin, after looking absently at him, had moved back to
his bride.

"Kitty, mind you’re the first to step on the carpet," said Countess
Nordston, coming up. "You’re a nice person!" she said to Levin.

Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.

Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments, and the
priest and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in the forepart
of the church. The priest turned to Levin saying something. Levin did
not hear what the priest said.

"Take the bride’s hand and lead her up," the best man said to Levin.

It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected of
him. For a long time they tried to set him right and made him begin
again—because he kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrong
arm—till he understood at last that what he had to do was, without
changing his position, to take her right hand in his right hand. When at
last he had taken the bride’s hand in the correct way, the priest walked
a few paces in front of them and stopped at the lectern. The crowd of
friends and relations moved after them, with a buzz of talk and a rustle
of skirts. Someone stooped down and pulled out the bride’s train. The
church became so still that the drops of wax could be heard falling from
the candles.

Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously, whispered something, and
making a sign to Levin, walked back again.

The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and holding them
sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he turned, facing the
bridal pair. The priest was the same old man that had confessed Levin.
He looked with weary and melancholy eyes at the bride and bridegroom,
sighed, and putting his right hand out from his vestment, blessed the
bridegroom with it, and also with a shade of solicitous tenderness laid
the crossed fingers on the bowed head of Kitty. Then he gave them the
candles, and taking the censer, moved slowly away from them.

"Can it be true?" thought Levin, and he looked round at his bride.
Looking down at her he saw her face in profile, and from the scarcely
perceptible quiver of her lips and eyelashes he knew she was aware of
his eyes upon her. She did not look round, but the high scalloped
collar, that reached her little pink ear, trembled faintly. He saw that
a sigh was held back in her throat, and the little hand in the long
glove shook as it held the candle.

Levin heard the words, and they impressed him. "How did they guess that
it is help, just help that one wants?" he thought, recalling all his
fears and doubts of late. "What do I know? what can I do in this fearful
business," he thought, "without help? Yes, it is help I want now."

"‘Joinest together in love them that were separate.’ What deep meaning
in those words, and how they correspond with what one feels at this
moment," thought Levin. "Is she feeling the same as I?"

Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty took
Kitty’s little ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it on the first
joint of his finger. "The servant of God, Konstantin, plights his troth
to the servant of God, Ekaterina." And putting his big ring on Kitty’s
touchingly weak, pink little finger, the priest said the same thing.

And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they had to
do, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by the priest in
a whisper. At last, having duly performed the ceremony, having signed
the rings with the cross, the priest handed Kitty the big ring, and
Levin the little one. Again they were puzzled, and passed the rings from
hand to hand, still without doing what was expected.

Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage, all his dreams
of how he would order his life, were mere childishness, and that it was
something he had not understood hitherto, and now understood less than
ever, though it was being performed upon him. The lump in his throat
rose higher and higher, tears that would not be checked came into his
eyes.

Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer. She was
deeply moved. The tears stood in her eyes, and she could not have spoken
without crying. She was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin; going back in
thought to her own wedding, she glanced at the radiant figure of Stepan
Arkadyevitch, forgot all the present, and remembered only her own
innocent love. She recalled not herself only, but all her women-friends
and acquaintances. She thought of them on the one day of their triumph,
when they had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown, with love and
hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and stepping
forward into the mysterious future. Among the brides that came back to
her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose proposed
divorce she had just been hearing. And she had stood just as innocent in
orange flowers and bridal veil. And now? "It’s terribly strange," she
said to herself. It was not merely the sisters, the women-friends and
female relations of the bride who were following every detail of the
ceremony. Women who were quite strangers, mere spectators, were watching
it excitedly, holding their breath, in fear of losing a single movement
or expression of the bride and bridegroom, and angrily not answering,
often not hearing, the remarks of the callous men, who kept making
joking or irrelevant observations.

When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread before
the lectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink silken stuff,
the choir sang a complicated and elaborate psalm, in which the bass and
tenor sang responses to one another, and the priest turning round
pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk rug. Though both had often
heard a great deal about the saying that the one who steps first on the
rug will be the head of the house, neither Levin nor Kitty were capable
of recollecting it, as they took the few steps towards it. They did not
hear the loud remarks and disputes that followed, some maintaining he
had stepped on first, and others that both had stepped on together.

Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance on her
face, and unconsciously her feeling infected him. He too, like her felt
glad and happy.

Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling over
the bride’s train, smiling too and seeming delighted at something, were
at one moment left behind, at the next treading on the bridal pair as
the priest came to a halt. The spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed to
have infected everyone in the church. It seemed to Levin that the priest
and the deacon too wanted to smile just as he did.

Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer and
congratulated the young people. Levin looked at Kitty, and he had never
before seen her look as she did. She was charming with the new radiance
of happiness in her face. Levin longed to say something to her, but he
did not know whether it was all over. The priest got him out of his
difficulty. He smiled his kindly smile and said gently, "Kiss your wife,
and you kiss your husband," and took the candles out of their hands.

Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm, and
with a new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the church. He did
not believe, he could not believe, that it was true. It was only when
their wondering and timid eyes met that he believed in it, because he
felt that they were one.

Levin had been married three months. He was happy, but not at all in the
way he had expected to be. At every step he found his former dreams
disappointed, and new, unexpected surprises of happiness. He was happy;
but on entering upon family life he saw at every step that it was
utterly different from what he had imagined. At every step he
experienced what a man would experience who, after admiring the smooth,
happy course of a little boat on a lake, should get himself into that
little boat. He saw that it was not all sitting still, floating
smoothly; that one had to think too, not for an instant to forget where
one was floating; and that there was water under one, and that one must
row; and that his unaccustomed hands would be sore; and that it was only
to look at it that was easy; but that doing it, though very delightful,
was very difficult.

As a bachelor, when he had watched other people’s married life, seen the
petty cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, he had only smiled
contemptuously in his heart. In his future married life there could be,
he was convinced, nothing of that sort; even the external forms, indeed,
he fancied, must be utterly unlike the life of others in everything. And
all of a sudden, instead of his life with his wife being made on an
individual pattern, it was, on the contrary, entirely made up of the
pettiest details, which he had so despised before, but which now, by no
will of his own, had gained an extraordinary importance that it was
useless to contend against. And Levin saw that the organization of all
these details was by no means so easy as he had fancied before. Although
Levin believed himself to have the most exact conceptions of domestic
life, unconsciously, like all men, he pictured domestic life as the
happiest enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder and no petty cares to
distract. He ought, as he conceived the position, to do his work, and to
find repose from it in the happiness of love. She ought to be beloved,
and nothing more. But, like all men, he forgot that she too would want
work. And he was surprised that she, his poetic, exquisite Kitty, could,
not merely in the first weeks, but even in the first days of their
married life, think, remember, and busy herself about tablecloths, and
furniture, about mattresses for visitors, about a tray, about the cook,
and the dinner, and so on. While they were still engaged, he had been
struck by the definiteness with which she had declined the tour abroad
and decided to go into the country, as though she knew of something she
wanted, and could still think of something outside her love. This had
jarred upon him then, and now her trivial cares and anxieties jarred
upon him several times. But he saw that this was essential for her. And,
loving her as he did, though he did not understand the reason of them,
and jeered at these domestic pursuits, he could not help admiring them.
He jeered at the way in which she arranged the furniture they had
brought from Moscow; rearranged their room; hung up curtains; prepared
rooms for visitors; a room for Dolly; saw after an abode for her new
maid; ordered dinner of the old cook; came into collision with Agafea
Mihalovna, taking from her the charge of the stores. He saw how the old
cook smiled, admiring her, and listening to her inexperienced,
impossible orders, how mournfully and tenderly Agafea Mihalovna shook
her head over the young mistress’s new arrangements. He saw that Kitty
was extraordinarily sweet when, laughing and crying, she came to tell
him that her maid, Masha, was used to looking upon her as her young
lady, and so no one obeyed her. It seemed to him sweet, but strange, and
he thought it would have been better without this.

This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin’s ideal of
exalted happiness, was at first one of the disappointments; and this
sweet care of her household, the aim of which he did not understand, but
could not help loving, was one of the new happy surprises.

Another disappointment and happy surprise came in their quarrels. Levin
could never have conceived that between him and his wife any relations
could arise other than tender, respectful and loving, and all at once in
the very early days they quarreled, so that she said he did not care for
her, that he cared for no one but himself, burst into tears, and wrung
her arms.

This first quarrel arose from Levin’s having gone out to a new farmhouse
and having been away half an hour too long, because he had tried to get
home by a short cut and had lost his way. He drove home thinking of
nothing but her, of her love, of his own happiness, and the nearer he
drew to home, the warmer was his tenderness for her. He ran into the
room with the same feeling, with an even stronger feeling than he had
had when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ house to make his offer. And
suddenly he was met by a lowering expression he had never seen in her.
He would have kissed her; she pushed him away.

During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of tension,
as it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the chain by which they
were bound. Altogether their honeymoon—that is to say, the month after
their wedding—from which from tradition Levin expected so much, was not
merely not a time of sweetness, but remained in the memories of both as
the bitterest and most humiliating period in their lives. They both
alike tried in later life to blot out from their memories all the
monstrous, shameful incidents of that morbid period, when both were
rarely in a normal frame of mind, both were rarely quite themselves.

They had just come back from Moscow, and were glad to be alone. He was
sitting at the writing table in his study, writing. She, wearing the
dark lilac dress she had worn during the first days of their married
life, and put on again today, a dress particularly remembered and loved
by him, was sitting on the sofa, the same old-fashioned leather sofa
which had always stood in the study in Levin’s father’s and
grandfather’s days. She was sewing at _broderie anglaise_. He thought
and wrote, never losing the happy consciousness of her presence. His
work, both on the land and on the book, in which the principles of the
new land system were to be laid down, had not been abandoned; but just
as formerly these pursuits and ideas had seemed to him petty and trivial
in comparison with the darkness that overspread all life, now they
seemed as unimportant and petty in comparison with the life that lay
before him suffused with the brilliant light of happiness. He went on
with his work, but he felt now that the center of gravity of his
attention had passed to something else, and that consequently he looked
at his work quite differently and more clearly. Formerly this work had
been for him an escape from life. Formerly he had felt that without this
work his life would be too gloomy. Now these pursuits were necessary for
him that life might not be too uniformly bright. Taking up his
manuscript, reading through what he had written, he found with pleasure
that the work was worth his working at. Many of his old ideas seemed to
him superfluous and extreme, but many blanks became distinct to him when
he reviewed the whole thing in his memory. He was writing now a new
chapter on the causes of the present disastrous condition of agriculture
in Russia. He maintained that the poverty of Russia arises not merely
from the anomalous distribution of landed property and misdirected
reforms, but that what had contributed of late years to this result was
the civilization from without abnormally grafted upon Russia, especially
facilities of communication, as railways, leading to centralization in
towns, the development of luxury, and the consequent development of
manufactures, credit and its accompaniment of speculation—all to the
detriment of agriculture. It seemed to him that in a normal development
of wealth in a state all these phenomena would arise only when a
considerable amount of labor had been put into agriculture, when it had
come under regular, or at least definite, conditions; that the wealth of
a country ought to increase proportionally, and especially in such a way
that other sources of wealth should not outstrip agriculture; that in
harmony with a certain stage of agriculture there should be means of
communication corresponding to it, and that in our unsettled condition
of the land, railways, called into being by political and not by
economic needs, were premature, and instead of promoting agriculture, as
was expected of them, they were competing with agriculture and promoting
the development of manufactures and credit, and so arresting its
progress; and that just as the one-sided and premature development of
one organ in an animal would hinder its general development, so in the
general development of wealth in Russia, credit, facilities of
communication, manufacturing activity, indubitably necessary in Europe,
where they had arisen in their proper time, had with us only done harm,
by throwing into the background the chief question calling for
settlement—the question of the organization of agriculture.

"Have they come from the town?" Levin asked Kouzma.

Left alone, after putting his manuscripts together in the new portfolio
bought by her, he washed his hands at the new washstand with the elegant
fittings, that had all made their appearance with her. Levin smiled at
his own thoughts, and shook his head disapprovingly at those thoughts; a
feeling akin to remorse fretted him. There was something shameful,
effeminate, Capuan, as he called it to himself, in his present mode of
life. "It’s not right to go on like this," he thought. "It’ll soon be
three months, and I’m doing next to nothing. Today, almost for the first
time, I set to work seriously, and what happened? I did nothing but
begin and throw it aside. Even my ordinary pursuits I have almost given
up. On the land I scarcely walk or drive about at all to look after
things. Either I am loath to leave her, or I see she’s dull alone. And I
used to think that, before marriage, life was nothing much, somehow
didn’t count, but that after marriage, life began in earnest. And here
almost three months have passed, and I have spent my time so idly and
unprofitably. No, this won’t do; I must begin. Of course, it’s not her
fault. She’s not to blame in any way. I ought myself to be firmer, to
maintain my masculine independence of action; or else I shall get into
such ways, and she’ll get used to them too.... Of course she’s not to
blame," he told himself.

But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisfied not to blame someone else,
and especially the person nearest of all to him, for the ground of his
dissatisfaction. And it vaguely came into Levin’s mind that she herself
was not to blame (she could not be to blame for anything), but what was
to blame was her education, too superficial and frivolous. ("That fool
Tcharsky: she wanted, I know, to stop him, but didn’t know how to.")
"Yes, apart from her interest in the house (that she has), apart from
dress and _broderie anglaise_, she has no serious interests. No interest
in her work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor in music, though she’s
rather good at it, nor in reading. She does nothing, and is perfectly
satisfied." Levin, in his heart, censured this, and did not as yet
understand that she was preparing for that period of activity which was
to come for her when she would at once be the wife of her husband and
mistress of the house, and would bear, and nurse, and bring up children.
He knew not that she was instinctively aware of this, and preparing
herself for this time of terrible toil, did not reproach herself for the
moments of carelessness and happiness in her love that she enjoyed now
while gaily building her nest for the future.

When Levin went upstairs, his wife was sitting near the new silver
samovar behind the new tea service, and, having settled old Agafea
Mihalovna at a little table with a full cup of tea, was reading a letter
from Dolly, with whom they were in continual and frequent
correspondence.

In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the final act of the
drama which had been enacted of late between her and Kitty. He saw that,
in spite of Agafea Mihalovna’s feelings being hurt by a new mistress
taking the reins of government out of her hands, Kitty had yet conquered
her and made her love her.

But Levin did not hear her. Flushing, he took the letter from Marya
Nikolaevna, his brother’s former mistress, and began to read it. This
was the second letter he had received from Marya Nikolaevna. In the
first letter, Marya Nikolaevna wrote that his brother had sent her away
for no fault of hers, and, with touching simplicity, added that though
she was in want again, she asked for nothing, and wished for nothing,
but was only tormented by the thought that Nikolay Dmitrievitch would
come to grief without her, owing to the weak state of his health, and
begged his brother to look after him. Now she wrote quite differently.
She had found Nikolay Dmitrievitch, had again made it up with him in
Moscow, and had moved with him to a provincial town, where he had
received a post in the government service. But that he had quarreled
with the head official, and was on his way back to Moscow, only he had
been taken so ill on the road that it was doubtful if he would ever
leave his bed again, she wrote. "It’s always of you he has talked, and,
besides, he has no more money left."

"I’m going because my brother is dying," said Levin. "Why should you..."

"And, at a moment of such gravity for me, she only thinks of her being
dull by herself," thought Levin. And this lack of candor in a matter of
such gravity infuriated him.

"Because it’ll be going God knows where, by all sorts of roads and to
all sorts of hotels. You would be a hindrance to me," said Levin, trying
to be cool.

"No; this is awful! To be such a slave!" cried Levin, getting up, and
unable to restrain his anger any longer. But at the same second he felt
that he was beating himself.

It was decided that they should go together the next day. Levin told his
wife that he believed she wanted to go simply in order to be of use,
agreed that Marya Nikolaevna’s being with his brother did not make her
going improper, but he set off at the bottom of his heart dissatisfied
both with her and with himself. He was dissatisfied with her for being
unable to make up her mind to let him go when it was necessary (and how
strange it was for him to think that he, so lately hardly daring to
believe in such happiness as that she could love him—now was unhappy
because she loved him too much!), and he was dissatisfied with himself
for not showing more strength of will. Even greater was the feeling of
disagreement at the bottom of his heart as to her not needing to
consider the woman who was with his brother, and he thought with horror
of all the contingencies they might meet with. The mere idea of his
wife, his Kitty, being in the same room with a common wench, set him
shuddering with horror and loathing.

The hotel of the provincial town where Nikolay Levin was lying ill was
one of those provincial hotels which are constructed on the newest model
of modern improvements, with the best intentions of cleanliness,
comfort, and even elegance, but owing to the public that patronizes
them, are with astounding rapidity transformed into filthy taverns with
a pretension of modern improvement that only makes them worse than the
old-fashioned, honestly filthy hotels. This hotel had already reached
that stage, and the soldier in a filthy uniform smoking in the entry,
supposed to stand for a hall-porter, and the cast-iron, slippery, dark,
and disagreeable staircase, and the free and easy waiter in a filthy
frock coat, and the common dining room with a dusty bouquet of wax
flowers adorning the table, and filth, dust, and disorder everywhere,
and at the same time the sort of modern up-to-date self-complacent
railway uneasiness of this hotel, aroused a most painful feeling in
Levin after their fresh young life, especially because the impression of
falsity made by the hotel was so out of keeping with what awaited them.

As is invariably the case, after they had been asked at what price they
wanted rooms, it appeared that there was not one decent room for them;
one decent room had been taken by the inspector of railroads, another by
a lawyer from Moscow, a third by Princess Astafieva from the country.
There remained only one filthy room, next to which they promised that
another should be empty by the evening. Feeling angry with his wife
because what he had expected had come to pass, which was that at the
moment of arrival, when his heart throbbed with emotion and anxiety to
know how his brother was getting on, he should have to be seeing after
her, instead of rushing straight to his brother, Levin conducted her to
the room assigned them.

Levin did not for the first moment understand what it was confused her,
but she immediately enlightened him.

Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not know what answer to
make.

But as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened and Kitty peeped
out. Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with his wife, who had
put herself and him in such a difficult position; but Marya Nikolaevna
crimsoned still more. She positively shrank together and flushed to the
point of tears, and clutching the ends of her apron in both hands,
twisted them in her red fingers without knowing what to say and what to
do.

For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in the
eyes with which Kitty looked at this awful woman, so incomprehensible to
her; but it lasted only a single instant.

"But one can’t go on talking in the passage like this!" Levin said,
looking angrily at a gentleman who walked jauntily at that instant
across the corridor, as though about his affairs.

Levin went to his brother’s room. He had not in the least expected what
he saw and felt in his brother’s room. He had expected to find him in
the same state of self-deception which he had heard was so frequent with
the consumptive, and which had struck him so much during his brother’s
visit in the autumn. He had expected to find the physical signs of the
approach of death more marked—greater weakness, greater emaciation, but
still almost the same condition of things. He had expected himself to
feel the same distress at the loss of the brother he loved and the same
horror in face of death as he had felt then, only in a greater degree.
And he had prepared himself for this; but he found something utterly
different.

In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls filthy with
spittle, and conversation audible through the thin partition from the
next room, in a stifling atmosphere saturated with impurities, on a
bedstead moved away from the wall, there lay covered with a quilt, a
body. One arm of this body was above the quilt, and the wrist, huge as a
rake-handle, was attached, inconceivably it seemed, to the thin, long
bone of the arm smooth from the beginning to the middle. The head lay
sideways on the pillow. Levin could see the scanty locks wet with sweat
on the temples and tense, transparent-looking forehead.

"It cannot be that that fearful body was my brother Nikolay?" thought
Levin. But he went closer, saw the face, and doubt became impossible. In
spite of the terrible change in the face, Levin had only to glance at
those eager eyes raised at his approach, only to catch the faint
movement of the mouth under the sticky mustache, to realize the terrible
truth that this death-like body was his living brother.

The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at his brother as
he drew near. And immediately this glance established a living
relationship between living men. Levin immediately felt the reproach in
the eyes fixed on him, and felt remorse at his own happiness.

"Yes ... no," said Levin, hesitating over his words. "How was it you
didn’t let me know before, that is, at the time of my wedding? I made
inquiries in all directions."

He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not know what to say,
especially as his brother made no reply, and simply stared without
dropping his eyes, and evidently penetrated to the inner meaning of each
word. Levin told his brother that his wife had come with him. Nikolay
expressed pleasure, but said he was afraid of frightening her by his
condition. A silence followed. Suddenly Nikolay stirred, and began to
say something. Levin expected something of peculiar gravity and
importance from the expression of his face, but Nikolay began speaking
of his health. He found fault with the doctor, regretting he had not a
celebrated Moscow doctor. Levin saw that he still hoped.

Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to escape, if
only for an instant, from his agonizing emotion, and said that he would
go and fetch his wife.

Levin made no answer. Going out into the corridor, he stopped short. He
had said he would fetch his wife, but now, taking stock of the emotion
he was feeling, he decided that he would try on the contrary to persuade
her not to go in to the sick man. "Why should she suffer as I am
suffering?" he thought.

"Oh, it’s awful, it’s awful! What did you come for?" said Levin.

Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his composure, and completely
forgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went again in to his
brother with Kitty.

Levin could not look calmly at his brother; he could not himself be
natural and calm in his presence. When he went in to the sick man, his
eyes and his attention were unconsciously dimmed, and he did not see and
did not distinguish the details of his brother’s position. He smelt the
awful odor, saw the dirt, disorder, and miserable condition, and heard
the groans, and felt that nothing could be done to help. It never
entered his head to analyze the details of the sick man’s situation, to
consider how that body was lying under the quilt, how those emaciated
legs and thighs and spine were lying huddled up, and whether they could
not be made more comfortable, whether anything could not be done to make
things, if not better, at least less bad. It made his blood run cold
when he began to think of all these details. He was absolutely convinced
that nothing could be done to prolong his brother’s life or to relieve
his suffering. But a sense of his regarding all aid as out of the
question was felt by the sick man, and exasperated him. And this made it
still more painful for Levin. To be in the sick-room was agony to him,
not to be there still worse. And he was continually, on various
pretexts, going out of the room, and coming in again, because he was
unable to remain alone.

The waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the dining
hall, came several times with an irate countenance in answer to her
summons, and could not avoid carrying out her orders, as she gave them
with such gracious insistence that there was no evading her. Levin did
not approve of all this; he did not believe it would be of any good to
the patient. Above all, he feared the patient would be angry at it. But
the sick man, though he seemed and was indifferent about it, was not
angry, but only abashed, and on the whole as it were interested in what
she was doing with him. Coming back from the doctor to whom Kitty had
sent him, Levin, on opening the door, came upon the sick man at the
instant when, by Kitty’s directions, they were changing his linen. The
long white ridge of his spine, with the huge, prominent shoulder blades
and jutting ribs and vertebrae, was bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and the
waiter were struggling with the sleeve of the night shirt, and could not
get the long, limp arm into it. Kitty, hurriedly closing the door after
Levin, was not looking that way; but the sick man groaned, and she moved
rapidly towards him.

Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick man settled comfortably
and everything about him completely changed. The heavy smell was
replaced by the smell of aromatic vinegar, which Kitty with pouting lips
and puffed-out, rosy cheeks was squirting through a little pipe. There
was no dust visible anywhere, a rug was laid by the bedside. On the
table stood medicine bottles and decanters tidily arranged, and the
linen needed was folded up there, and Kitty’s _broderie anglaise_. On
the other table by the patient’s bed there were candles and drink and
powders. The sick man himself, washed and combed, lay in clean sheets on
high raised pillows, in a clean night-shirt with a white collar about
his astoundingly thin neck, and with a new expression of hope looked
fixedly at Kitty.

The doctor brought by Levin, and found by him at the club, was not the
one who had been attending Nikolay Levin, as the patient was
dissatisfied with him. The new doctor took up a stethoscope and sounded
the patient, shook his head, prescribed medicine, and with extreme
minuteness explained first how to take the medicine and then what diet
was to be kept to. He advised eggs, raw or hardly cooked, and seltzer
water, with warm milk at a certain temperature. When the doctor had gone
away the sick man said something to his brother, of which Levin could
distinguish only the last words: "Your Katya." By the expression with
which he gazed at her, Levin saw that he was praising her. He called
indeed to Katya, as he called her.

Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that terrible body, to
take hold of that under the quilt, of which he preferred to know
nothing, under his wife’s influence he made his resolute face that she
knew so well, and putting his arms into the bed took hold of the body,
but in spite of his own strength he was struck by the strange heaviness
of those powerless limbs. While he was turning him over, conscious of
the huge emaciated arm about his neck, Kitty swiftly and noiselessly
turned the pillow, beat it up and settled in it the sick man’s head,
smoothing back his hair, which was sticking again to his moist brow.

The sick man kept his brother’s hand in his own. Levin felt that he
meant to do something with his hand and was pulling it somewhere. Levin
yielded with a sinking heart: yes, he drew it to his mouth and kissed
it. Levin, shaking with sobs and unable to articulate a word, went out
of the room.

"Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed
them unto babes." So Levin thought about his wife as he talked to her
that evening.

Levin thought of the text, not because he considered himself "wise and
prudent." He did not so consider himself, but he could not help knowing
that he had more intellect than his wife and Agafea Mihalovna, and he
could not help knowing that when he thought of death, he thought with
all the force of his intellect. He knew too that the brains of many
great men, whose thoughts he had read, had brooded over death and yet
knew not a hundredth part of what his wife and Agafea Mihalovna knew
about it. Different as those two women were, Agafea Mihalovna and Katya,
as his brother Nikolay had called her, and as Levin particularly liked
to call her now, they were quite alike in this. Both knew, without a
shade of doubt, what sort of thing life was and what was death, and
though neither of them could have answered, and would even not have
understood the questions that presented themselves to Levin, both had no
doubt of the significance of this event, and were precisely alike in
their way of looking at it, which they shared with millions of people.
The proof that they knew for a certainty the nature of death lay in the
fact that they knew without a second of hesitation how to deal with the
dying, and were not frightened of them. Levin and other men like him,
though they could have said a great deal about death, obviously did not
know this since they were afraid of death, and were absolutely at a loss
what to do when people were dying. If Levin had been alone now with his
brother Nikolay, he would have looked at him with terror, and with still
greater terror waited, and would not have known what else to do.

On getting back from the sick-room to their own two rooms for the night,
Levin sat with hanging head not knowing what to do. Not to speak of
supper, of preparing for bed, of considering what they were going to do,
he could not even talk to his wife; he was ashamed to. Kitty, on the
contrary, was more active than usual. She was even livelier than usual.
She ordered supper to be brought, herself unpacked their things, and
herself helped to make the beds, and did not even forget to sprinkle
them with Persian powder. She showed that alertness, that swiftness of
reflection comes out in men before a battle, in conflict, in the
dangerous and decisive moments of life—those moments when a man shows
once and for all his value, and that all his past has not been wasted
but has been a preparation for these moments.

Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to talk even now,
and it seemed to him that every movement he made was unseemly. She
arranged the brushes, but she did it all so that there was nothing
shocking in it.

"Do you suppose he can possibly recover?" said Levin, watching a slender
tress at the back of her round little head that was continually hidden
when she passed the comb through the front.

"Yes, you see this woman, Marya Nikolaevna, did not know how to manage
all this," said Levin. "And ... I must own I’m very, very glad you came.
You are such purity that...." He took her hand and did not kiss it (to
kiss her hand in such closeness to death seemed to him improper); he
merely squeezed it with a penitent air, looking at her brightening eyes.

The next day the sick man received the sacrament and extreme unction.
During the ceremony Nikolay Levin prayed fervently. His great eyes,
fastened on the holy image that was set out on a card table covered with
a colored napkin, expressed such passionate prayer and hope that it was
awful to Levin to see it. Levin knew that this passionate prayer and
hope would only make him feel more bitterly parting from the life he so
loved. Levin knew his brother and the workings of his intellect: he knew
that his unbelief came not from life being easier for him without faith,
but had grown up because step by step the contemporary scientific
interpretation of natural phenomena crushed out the possibility of
faith; and so he knew that his present return was not a legitimate one,
brought about by way of the same working of his intellect, but simply a
temporary, interested return to faith in a desperate hope of recovery.
Levin knew too that Kitty had strengthened his hope by accounts of the
marvelous recoveries she had heard of. Levin knew all this; and it was
agonizingly painful to him to behold the supplicating, hopeful eyes and
the emaciated wrist, lifted with difficulty, making the sign of the
cross on the tense brow, and the prominent shoulders and hollow, gasping
chest, which one could not feel consistent with the life the sick man
was praying for. During the sacrament Levin did what he, an unbeliever,
had done a thousand times. He said, addressing God, "If Thou dost exist,
make this man to recover" (of course this same thing has been repeated
many times), "and Thou wilt save him and me."

After extreme unction the sick man became suddenly much better. He did
not cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kitty’s hand,
thanking her with tears, and said he was comfortable, free from pain,
and that he felt strong and had an appetite. He even raised himself when
his soup was brought, and asked for a cutlet as well. Hopelessly ill as
he was, obvious as it was at the first glance that he could not recover,
Levin and Kitty were for that hour both in the same state of excitement,
happy, though fearful of being mistaken.

This self-deception was not of long duration. The sick man fell into a
quiet sleep, but he was waked up half an hour later by his cough. And
all at once every hope vanished in those about him and in himself. The
reality of his suffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty and in the
sick man himself, leaving no doubt, no memory even of past hopes.

Without referring to what he had believed in half an hour before, as
though ashamed even to recall it, he asked for iodine to inhale in a
bottle covered with perforated paper. Levin gave him the bottle, and the
same look of passionate hope with which he had taken the sacrament was
now fastened on his brother, demanding from him the confirmation of the
doctor’s words that inhaling iodine worked wonders.

"Is Katya not here?" he gasped, looking round while Levin reluctantly
assented to the doctor’s words. "No; so I can say it.... It was for her
sake I went through that farce. She’s so sweet; but you and I can’t
deceive ourselves. This is what I believe in," he said, and, squeezing
the bottle in his bony hand, he began breathing over it.

At eight o’clock in the evening Levin and his wife were drinking tea in
their room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them breathlessly. She was
pale, and her lips were quivering. "He is dying!" she whispered. "I’m
afraid will die this minute."

"How do you feel?" Levin asked in a whisper, after a silence.

Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made her go out.

"Why do you think so?" said Levin, so as to say something.

Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him, and gazed at
his face, holding his breath. The dying man lay with closed eyes, but
the muscles twitched from time to time on his forehead, as with one
thinking deeply and intensely. Levin involuntarily thought with him of
what it was that was happening to him now, but in spite of all his
mental efforts to go along with him he saw by the expression of that
calm, stern face that for the dying man all was growing clearer and
clearer that was still as dark as ever for Levin.

For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin, the sick man lay
motionless. But he was still alive, and from time to time he sighed.
Levin by now was exhausted from mental strain. He felt that, with no
mental effort, could he understand what it was that was _right_. He
could not even think of the problem of death itself, but with no will of
his own thoughts kept coming to him of what he had to do next; closing
the dead man’s eyes, dressing him, ordering the coffin. And, strange to
say, he felt utterly cold, and was not conscious of sorrow nor of loss,
less still of pity for his brother. If he had any feeling for his
brother at that moment, it was envy for the knowledge the dying man had
now that he could not have.

A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the end. But
the end did not come. The door opened and Kitty appeared. Levin got up
to stop her. But at the moment he was getting up, he caught the sound of
the dying man stirring.

"Don’t go away," said Nikolay and held out his hand. Levin gave him his,
and angrily waved to his wife to go away.

With the dying man’s hand in his hand, he sat for half an hour, an hour,
another hour. He did not think of death at all now. He wondered what
Kitty was doing; who lived in the next room; whether the doctor lived in
a house of his own. He longed for food and for sleep. He cautiously drew
away his hand and felt the feet. The feet were cold, but the sick man
was still breathing. Levin tried again to move away on tiptoe, but the
sick man stirred again and said: "Don’t go."

The dawn came; the sick man’s condition was unchanged. Levin stealthily
withdrew his hand, and without looking at the dying man, went off to his
own room and went to sleep. When he woke up, instead of news of his
brother’s death which he expected, he learned that the sick man had
returned to his earlier condition. He had begun sitting up again,
coughing, had begun eating again, talking again, and again had ceased to
talk of death, again had begun to express hope of his recovery, and had
become more irritable and more gloomy than ever. No one, neither his
brother nor Kitty, could soothe him. He was angry with everyone, and
said nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone for his sufferings,
and insisted that they should get him a celebrated doctor from Moscow.
To all inquiries made him as to how he felt, he made the same answer
with an expression of vindictive reproachfulness, "I’m suffering
horribly, intolerably!"

The sick man was suffering more and more, especially from bedsores,
which it was impossible now to remedy, and grew more and more angry with
everyone about him, blaming them for everything, and especially for not
having brought him a doctor from Moscow. Kitty tried in every possible
way to relieve him, to soothe him; but it was all in vain, and Levin saw
that she herself was exhausted both physically and morally, though she
would not admit it. The sense of death, which had been evoked in all by
his taking leave of life on the night when he had sent for his brother,
was broken up. Everyone knew that he must inevitably die soon, that he
was half dead already. Everyone wished for nothing but that he should
die as soon as possible, and everyone, concealing this, gave him
medicines, tried to find remedies and doctors, and deceived him and
themselves and each other. All this was falsehood, disgusting,
irreverent deceit. And owing to the bent of his character, and because
he loved the dying man more than anyone else did, Levin was most
painfully conscious of this deceit.

Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of reconciling his
brothers, at least in face of death, had written to his brother, Sergey
Ivanovitch, and having received an answer from him, he read this letter
to the sick man. Sergey Ivanovitch wrote that he could not come himself,
and in touching terms he begged his brother’s forgiveness.

"What am I to write to him?" said Levin. "I hope you are not angry with
him?"

Three more days of agony followed; the sick man was still in the same
condition. The sense of longing for his death was felt by everyone now
at the mere sight of him, by the waiters and the hotel-keeper and all
the people staying in the hotel, and the doctor and Marya Nikolaevna and
Levin and Kitty. The sick man alone did not express this feeling, but on
the contrary was furious at their not getting him doctors, and went on
taking medicine and talking of life. Only at rare moments, when the
opium gave him an instant’s relief from the never-ceasing pain, he would
sometimes, half asleep, utter what was ever more intense in his heart
than in all the others: "Oh, if it were only the end!" or: "When will it
be over?"

"It will be over today, you will see," said Marya Nikolaevna. Though it
was said in a whisper, the sick man, whose hearing Levin had noticed was
very keen, must have heard. Levin said hush to her, and looked round at
the sick man. Nikolay had heard; but these words produced no effect on
him. His eyes had still the same intense, reproachful look.

"Why do you think so?" Levin asked her, when she had followed him into
the corridor.

"Like this," she said, tugging at the folds of her woolen skirt. Levin
noticed, indeed, that all that day the patient pulled at himself, as it
were, trying to snatch something away.

While the priest was reading it, the dying man did not show any sign of
life; his eyes were closed. Levin, Kitty, and Marya Nikolaevna stood at
the bedside. The priest had not quite finished reading the prayer when
the dying man stretched, sighed, and opened his eyes. The priest, on
finishing the prayer, put the cross to the cold forehead, then slowly
returned it to the stand, and after standing for two minutes more in
silence, he touched the huge, bloodless hand that was turning cold.

The sight of his brother, and the nearness of death, revived in Levin
that sense of horror in face of the insoluble enigma, together with the
nearness and inevitability of death, that had come upon him that autumn
evening when his brother had come to him. This feeling was now even
stronger than before; even less than before did he feel capable of
apprehending the meaning of death, and its inevitability rose up before
him more terrible than ever. But now, thanks to his wife’s presence,
that feeling did not reduce him to despair. In spite of death, he felt
the need of life and love. He felt that love saved him from despair, and
that this love, under the menace of despair, had become still stronger
and purer. The one mystery of death, still unsolved, had scarcely passed
before his eyes, when another mystery had arisen, as insoluble, urging
him to love and to life.

Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at Pokrovskoe, at
her sister Kitty Levin’s. The house on her own estate was quite in
ruins, and Levin and his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer with
them. Stepan Arkadyevitch greatly approved of the arrangement. He said
he was very sorry his official duties prevented him from spending the
summer in the country with his family, which would have been the
greatest happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he came down to the
country from time to time for a day or two. Besides the Oblonskys, with
all their children and their governess, the old princess too came to
stay that summer with the Levins, as she considered it her duty to watch
over her inexperienced daughter in her _interesting condition_.
Moreover, Varenka, Kitty’s friend abroad, kept her promise to come to
Kitty when she was married, and stayed with her friend. All of these
were friends or relations of Levin’s wife. And though he liked them all,
he rather regretted his own Levin world and ways, which was smothered by
this influx of the "Shtcherbatsky element," as he called it to himself.
Of his own relations there stayed with him only Sergey Ivanovitch, but
he too was a man of the Koznishev and not the Levin stamp, so that the
Levin spirit was utterly obliterated.

In the Levins’ house, so long deserted, there were now so many people
that almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day it
happened that the old princess, sitting down to table, counted them all
over, and put the thirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a separate
table. And Kitty, with her careful housekeeping, had no little trouble
to get all the chickens, turkeys, and geese, of which so many were
needed to satisfy the summer appetites of the visitors and children.

"Oh, we shall be delighted," answered Varenka, coloring a little. Kitty
exchanged meaningful glances with Dolly. The proposal of the learned and
intellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with Varenka
confirmed certain theories of Kitty’s with which her mind had been very
busy of late. She made haste to address some remark to her mother, so
that her look should not be noticed. After dinner Sergey Ivanovitch sat
with his cup of coffee at the drawing-room window, and while he took
part in a conversation he had begun with his brother, he watched the
door through which the children would start on the mushroom-picking
expedition. Levin was sitting in the window near his brother.

"And are you coming with us?" Varenka said to Levin in confusion,
pretending not to have heard what had been said.

"I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to check the invoice,"
said Levin; "and where will you be?"

On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party. They always
liked sitting there after dinner, and that day they had work to do there
too. Besides the sewing and knitting of baby clothes, with which all of
them were busy, that afternoon jam was being made on the terrace by a
method new to Agafea Mihalovna, without the addition of water. Kitty had
introduced this new method, which had been in use in her home. Agafea
Mihalovna, to whom the task of jam-making had always been intrusted,
considering that what had been done in the Levin household could not be
amiss, had nevertheless put water with the strawberries, maintaining
that the jam could not be made without it. She had been caught in the
act, and was now making jam before everyone, and it was to be proved to
her conclusively that jam could be very well made without water.

"A nice person to think about! Horrid, repulsive woman—no heart," said
her mother, who could not forget that Kitty had married not Vronsky, but
Levin.

"What’s that you don’t want to think about?" inquired Levin, coming onto
the terrace.

Levin never called the princess "maman" as men often do call their
mothers-in-law, and the princess disliked his not doing so. But though
he liked and respected the princess, Levin could not call her so without
a sense of profaning his feeling for his dead mother.

"Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?" said Levin, smiling to Agafea
Mihalovna, and trying to cheer her up. "Is it all right in the new way?"

"Ah!" said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than to the
words she was saying, and all the while paying attention to the road,
which passed now through the forest, and avoiding places where she might
make a false step.

"I don’t know what to think," Levin answered, smiling. "Sergey seems
very strange to me in that way. I told you, you know..."

Levin had grown used by now to uttering his thought boldly, without
taking the trouble of clothing it in exact language. He knew that his
wife, in such moments of loving tenderness as now, would understand what
he meant to say from a hint, and she did understand him.

"It’s not as it was with poor Nikolay ... you really cared for each
other," Levin finished. "Why not speak of him?" he added. "I sometimes
blame myself for not; it ends in one’s forgetting. Ah, how terrible and
dear he was!... Yes, what were we talking about?" Levin said, after a
pause.

"It’s not so much that he can’t fall in love," Levin said, smiling, "but
he has not the weakness necessary.... I’ve always envied him, and even
now, when I’m so happy, I still envy him."

"I envy him for being better than I," said Levin. "He does not live for
himself. His whole life is subordinated to his duty. And that’s why he
can be calm and contented."

"Of course not," said Levin. "But I’m so happy that I don’t understand
anything. So you think he’ll make her an offer today?" he added after a
brief silence.

"He does, he doesn’t," said Levin, tearing off the white petals.

"Oh, but see, this little one shan’t count to make up," said Levin,
tearing off a little half-grown petal. "Here’s the wagonette overtaking
us."

"Gently, children, gently!" Levin shouted quite angrily to the children,
standing before his wife to protect her when the crowd of children flew
with shrieks of delight to meet them.

"It doesn’t bite," said Kitty, her smile and manner of speaking
recalling her father, a likeness Levin often noticed with pleasure.

During the time of the children’s tea the grown-up people sat in the
balcony and talked as though nothing had happened, though they all,
especially Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very well aware that
there had happened an event which, though negative, was of very great
importance. They both had the same feeling, rather like that of a
schoolboy after an examination, which has left him in the same class or
shut him out of the school forever. Everyone present, feeling too that
something had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects. Levin
and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of their love that
evening. And their happiness in their love seemed to imply a
disagreeable slur on those who would have liked to feel the same and
could not—and they felt a prick of conscience.

"That’s my lesson! No, Dolly, I’m going," said Levin, jumping up.

Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go over the lessons of
the term in the summer holidays. Darya Alexandrovna, who had been
studying Latin with her son in Moscow before, had made it a rule on
coming to the Levins’ to go over with him, at least once a day, the most
difficult lessons of Latin and arithmetic. Levin had offered to take her
place, but the mother, having once overheard Levin’s lesson, and
noticing that it was not given exactly as the teacher in Moscow had
given it, said resolutely, though with much embarrassment and anxiety
not to mortify Levin, that they must keep strictly to the book as the
teacher had done, and that she had better undertake it again herself.
Levin was amazed both at Stepan Arkadyevitch, who, by neglecting his
duty, threw upon the mother the supervision of studies of which she had
no comprehension, and at the teachers for teaching the children so
badly. But he promised his sister-in-law to give the lessons exactly as
she wished. And he went on teaching Grisha, not in his own way, but by
the book, and so took little interest in it, and often forgot the hour
of the lesson. So it had been today.

And Levin went to Grisha.

Varenka was saying the same thing to Kitty. Even in the happy,
well-ordered household of the Levins Varenka had succeeded in making
herself useful.

In the middle of their conversation they heard the snorting of horses
and the sound of wheels on the gravel. Dolly had not time to get up to
go and meet her husband, when from the window of the room below, where
Grisha was having his lesson, Levin leaped out and helped Grisha out
after him.

"It’s Stiva!" Levin shouted from under the balcony. "We’ve finished,
Dolly, don’t be afraid!" he added, and started running like a boy to
meet the carriage.

"And some one else too! Papa, of course!" cried Levin, stopping at the
entrance of the avenue. "Kitty, don’t come down the steep staircase, go
round."

But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person sitting in the carriage
for the old prince. As he got nearer to the carriage he saw beside
Stepan Arkadyevitch not the prince but a handsome, stout young man in a
Scotch cap, with long ends of ribbon behind. This was Vassenka
Veslovsky, a distant cousin of the Shtcherbatskys, a brilliant young
gentleman in Petersburg and Moscow society. "A capital fellow, and a
keen sportsman," as Stepan Arkadyevitch said, introducing him.

Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by his having come in
place of the old prince, Veslovsky greeted Levin gaily, claiming
acquaintance with him in the past, and snatching up Grisha into the
carriage, lifted him over the pointer that Stepan Arkadyevitch had
brought with him.

Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind. He was rather
vexed at the non-arrival of the old prince, whom he liked more and more
the more he saw of him, and also at the arrival of this Vassenka
Veslovsky, a quite uncongenial and superfluous person. He seemed to him
still more uncongenial and superfluous when, on approaching the steps
where the whole party, children and grown-up, were gathered together in
much excitement, Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly warm
and gallant air, kissing Kitty’s hand.

"Your wife and I are cousins and very old friends," said Vassenka
Veslovsky, once more shaking Levin’s hand with great warmth.

"Well, are there plenty of birds?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Levin,
hardly leaving time for everyone to utter their greetings. "We’ve come
with the most savage intentions. Why, maman, they’ve not been in Moscow
since! Look, Tanya, here’s something for you! Get it, please, it’s in
the carriage, behind!" he talked in all directions. "How pretty you’ve
grown, Dolly," he said to his wife, once more kissing her hand, holding
it in one of his, and patting it with the other.

Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of mind, now
looked darkly at everyone, and everything displeased him.

"She doesn’t believe in his love. So what is she so pleased about?
Revolting!" thought Levin.

Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto the steps, seemed to
him unpleasant with the show of cordiality with which he met Stepan
Arkadyevitch, though Levin knew that his brother neither liked nor
respected Oblonsky.

Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as soon as they were
all seated, Levin turned and went out.

Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon him to
supper. On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna,
consulting about wines for supper.

"I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any shooting yet
this year?" said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his leg, but
speaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so well in him, and
that was so out of keeping with him. "I can’t answer for our finding
grouse, but there are plenty of snipe. Only we ought to start early.
You’re not tired? Aren’t you tired, Stiva?"

Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never pausing
in his conversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw that there was
an eager and mysterious conversation going on between Stepan
Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky. And that was not all. He saw
on his wife’s face an expression of real feeling as she gazed with fixed
eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who was telling them something
with great animation.

The motive of Kitty’s words was interpreted by Levin thus: "Don’t
separate me from _him_. I don’t care about _your_ going, but do let me
enjoy the society of this delightful young man."

"Oh, if you wish, we’ll stay here tomorrow," Levin answered, with
peculiar amiability.

Levin saw that look. He turned white, and for a minute he could hardly
breathe. "How dare he look at my wife like that!" was the feeling that
boiled within him.

Levin’s jealousy went further still. Already he saw himself a deceived
husband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply necessary to
provide them with the conveniences and pleasures of life.... But in
spite of that he made polite and hospitable inquiries of Vassenka about
his shooting, his gun, and his boots, and agreed to go shooting next
day.

Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by getting up
herself and advising Kitty to go to bed. But even at this point Levin
could not escape another agony. As he said good-night to his hostess,
Vassenka would again have kissed her hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew
back her hand and said with a naïve bluntness, for which the old
princess scolded her afterwards:

In Levin’s eyes she was to blame for having allowed such relations to
arise, and still more to blame for showing so awkwardly that she did not
like them.

Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in his wife’s
bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she asked him what was
wrong. But when at last with a timid glance she hazarded the question:
"Was there perhaps something you disliked about Veslovsky?"—it all burst
out, and he told her all. He was humiliated himself at what he was
saying, and that exasperated him all the more.

"Well, well!" Levin said in dismay.

She told him what they had been talking about. And as she told him, she
was breathless with emotion. Levin was silent for a space, then he
scanned her pale and distressed face, and suddenly he clutched at his
head.

"Oh, then I’ll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm him with
civility," said Levin, kissing her hands. "You shall see. Tomorrow....
Oh, yes, we are going tomorrow."

Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right. Levin had run up again to his wife to
ask her once more if she forgave him for his idiocy yesterday, and,
moreover, to beg her for Christ’s sake to be more careful. The great
thing was for her to keep away from the children—they might any minute
push against her. Then he had once more to hear her declare that she was
not angry with him for going away for two days, and to beg her to be
sure to send him a note next morning by a servant on horseback, to write
him, if it were but two words only, to let him know that all was well
with her.

Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which he had already taken his
seat, to meet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with a rule in
his hand.

"You should have listened to me," Levin answered with annoyance. "I
said: Put the lines and then fit in the steps. Now there’s no setting it
right. Do as I told you, and make a new staircase."

Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in the
dust.

"Well, then, do it as you’re told," Levin shouted, seating himself in
the wagonette. "Down! Hold the dogs, Philip!"

Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household cares such
an eager sense of joy in life and expectation that he was not disposed
to talk. Besides that, he had that feeling of concentrated excitement
that every sportsman experiences as he approaches the scene of action.
If he had anything on his mind at that moment, it was only the doubt
whether they would start anything in the Kolpensky marsh, whether Laska
would show to advantage in comparison with Krak, and whether he would
shoot well that day himself. Not to disgrace himself before a new
spectator—not to be outdone by Oblonsky—that too was a thought that
crossed his brain.

Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative. Vassenka
Veslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless flow of cheerful chatter. As he
listened to him now, Levin felt ashamed to think how unfair he had been
to him the day before. Vassenka was really a nice fellow, simple,
good-hearted, and very good-humored. If Levin had met him before he was
married, he would have made friends with him. Levin rather disliked his
holiday attitude to life and a sort of free and easy assumption of
elegance. It was as though he assumed a high degree of importance in
himself that could not be disputed, because he had long nails and a
stylish cap, and everything else to correspond; but this could be
forgiven for the sake of his good nature and good breeding. Levin liked
him for his good education, for speaking French and English with such an
excellent accent, and for being a man of his world.

Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a horse of the Don
Steppes. He kept praising him enthusiastically. "How fine it must be
galloping over the steppes on a steppe horse! Eh? isn’t it?" he said. He
had imagined riding on a steppe horse as something wild and romantic,
and it turned out nothing of the sort. But his simplicity, particularly
in conjunction with his good looks, his amiable smile, and the grace of
his movements, was very attractive. Either because his nature was
sympathetic to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone for his sins
of the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was good in him,
anyway he liked his society.

"Do you know what, Levin, I’ll gallop home on that left trace-horse.
That will be splendid. Eh?" he said, preparing to get out.

"No, why should you?" answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka could
hardly weigh less than seventeen stone. "I’ll send the coachman."

The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin himself drove the
remaining pair.

Levin would himself have liked to go into these little places, but they
were near home; he could shoot them over any time, and they were only
little places—there would hardly be room for three to shoot. And so,
with some insincerity, he said that he doubted there being anything to
shoot. When they reached a little marsh Levin would have driven by, but
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the experienced eye of a sportsman, at once
detected reeds visible from the road.

"Levin, do, please! how delightful!" Vassenka Veslovsky began begging,
and Levin could but consent.

"There won’t be room for three. I’ll stay here," said Levin, hoping they
would find nothing but peewits, who had been startled by the dogs, and
turning over in their flight, were plaintively wailing over the marsh.

"No! Come along, Levin, let’s go together!" Veslovsky called.

Levin remained with the wagonette, and looked enviously at the
sportsmen. They walked right across the marsh. Except little birds and
peewits, of which Vassenka killed one, there was nothing in the marsh.

"Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the marsh," said
Levin, "only it’s wasting time."

The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked his head against the
stock of someone’s gun, and there was the report of a shot. The gun did
actually go off first, but that was how it seemed to Levin. It appeared
that Vassenka Veslovsky had pulled only one trigger, and had left the
other hammer still cocked. The charge flew into the ground without doing
harm to anyone. Stepan Arkadyevitch shook his head and laughed
reprovingly at Veslovsky. But Levin had not the heart to reprove him. In
the first place, any reproach would have seemed to be called forth by
the danger he had incurred and the bump that had come up on Levin’s
forehead. And besides, Veslovsky was at first so naïvely distressed, and
then laughed so good-humoredly and infectiously at their general dismay,
that one could not but laugh with him.

When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and would
inevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to persuade them to
pass it by. But Veslovsky again overpersuaded him. Again, as the marsh
was narrow, Levin, like a good host, remained with the carriage.

Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman’s envy. He handed the
reins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.

Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting against the
injustice of her treatment, flew straight ahead to a hopeful place that
Levin knew well, and that Krak had not yet come upon.

"She won’t scare them," answered Levin, sympathizing with his bitch’s
pleasure and hurrying after her.

"Come, come, Stiva!" shouted Levin, feeling his heart beginning to beat
more violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort of shutter had
been drawn back from his straining ears, all sounds, confused but loud,
began to beat on his hearing, losing all sense of distance. He heard the
steps of Stepan Arkadyevitch, mistaking them for the tramp of the horses
in the distance; he heard the brittle sound of the twigs on which he had
trodden, taking this sound for the flying of a grouse. He heard too, not
far behind him, a splashing in the water, which he could not explain to
himself.

Not a grouse but a snipe flew up from beside the dog. Levin had lifted
his gun, but at the very instant when he was taking aim, the sound of
splashing grew louder, came closer, and was joined with the sound of
Veslovsky’s voice, shouting something with strange loudness. Levin saw
he had his gun pointed behind the snipe, but still he fired.

When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked round and saw the
horses and the wagonette not on the road but in the marsh.

"Damn the fellow!" Levin said to himself, as he went back to the
carriage that had sunk in the mire. "What did you drive in for?" he said
to him dryly, and calling the coachman, he began pulling the horses out.

Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at his horses
getting stuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that neither Stepan
Arkadyevitch nor Veslovsky helped him and the coachman to unharness the
horses and get them out, since neither of them had the slightest notion
of harnessing. Without vouchsafing a syllable in reply to Vassenka’s
protestations that it had been quite dry there, Levin worked in silence
with the coachman at extricating the horses. But then, as he got warm at
the work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was tugging at the wagonette
by one of the mud-guards, so that he broke it indeed, Levin blamed
himself for having under the influence of yesterday’s feelings been too
cold to Veslovsky, and tried to be particularly genial so as to smooth
over his chilliness. When everything had been put right, and the
carriage had been brought back to the road, Levin had the lunch served.

"_Bon appétit—bonne conscience! Ce poulet va tomber jusqu’au fond de mes
bottes_," Vassenka, who had recovered his spirits, quoted the French
saying as he finished his second chicken. "Well, now our troubles are
over, now everything’s going to go well. Only, to atone for my sins, I’m
bound to sit on the box. That’s so? eh? No, no! I’ll be your Automedon.
You shall see how I’ll get you along," he answered, not letting go the
rein, when Levin begged him to let the coachman drive. "No, I must atone
for my sins, and I’m very comfortable on the box." And he drove.

Levin was a little afraid he would exhaust the horses, especially the
chestnut, whom he did not know how to hold in; but unconsciously he fell
under the influence of his gaiety and listened to the songs he sang all
the way on the box, or the descriptions and representations he gave of
driving in the English fashion, four-in-hand; and it was in the very
best of spirits that after lunch they drove to the Gvozdyov marsh.

As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of their
expedition, Levin could not help considering how he could get rid of
Vassenka and be free in his movements. Stepan Arkadyevitch evidently had
the same desire, and on his face Levin saw the look of anxiety always
present in a true sportsman when beginning shooting, together with a
certain good-humored slyness peculiar to him.

"Now, gentlemen," said Levin, pulling up his boots and examining the
lock of his gun with rather a gloomy expression, "do you see those
reeds?" He pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mown
wet meadow that stretched along the right bank of the river. "The marsh
begins here, straight in front of us, do you see—where it is greener?
From here it runs to the right where the horses are; there are breeding
places there, and grouse, and all round those reeds as far as that
alder, and right up to the mill. Over there, do you see, where the pools
are? That’s the best place. There I once shot seventeen snipe. We’ll
separate with the dogs and go in different directions, and then meet
over there at the mill."

Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.

As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting about
together and made towards the green, slime-covered pool. Levin knew
Laska’s method, wary and indefinite; he knew the place too and expected
a whole covey of snipe.

"Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!" he said in a faint voice to his
companion splashing in the water behind him. Levin could not help
feeling an interest in the direction his gun was pointed, after that
casual shot near the Kolpensky marsh.

But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty’s words at
parting: "Mind you don’t shoot one another." The dogs came nearer and
nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own scent. The expectation
of snipe was so intense that to Levin the squelching sound of his own
heel, as he drew it up out of the mire, seemed to be the call of a
snipe, and he clutched and pressed the lock of his gun.

"Bang! bang!" sounded almost in his ear. Vassenka had fired at a flock
of ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at that moment
towards the sportsmen, far out of range. Before Levin had time to look
round, there was the whir of one snipe, another, a third, and some eight
more rose one after another.

Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too low, and missed;
he aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that instant another
snipe flew up at his very feet, distracting him so that he missed again.

While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and Veslovsky,
who had had time to load again, sent two charges of small-shot into the
water. Stepan Arkadyevitch picked up his snipe, and with sparkling eyes
looked at Levin.

"Well, now let us separate," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and limping on
his left foot, holding his gun in readiness and whistling to his dog, he
walked off in one direction. Levin and Veslovsky walked in the other.

It always happened with Levin that when his first shots were a failure
he got hot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole day. So it was
that day. The snipe showed themselves in numbers. They kept flying up
from just under the dogs, from under the sportsmen’s legs, and Levin
might have retrieved his ill luck. But the more he shot, the more he
felt disgraced in the eyes of Veslovsky, who kept popping away merrily
and indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in the slightest abashed
by his ill success. Levin, in feverish haste, could not restrain
himself, got more and more out of temper, and ended by shooting almost
without a hope of hitting. Laska, indeed, seemed to understand this. She
began looking more languidly, and gazed back at the sportsmen, as it
were, with perplexity or reproach in her eyes. Shots followed shots in
rapid succession. The smoke of the powder hung about the sportsmen,
while in the great roomy net of the game bag there were only three light
little snipe. And of these one had been killed by Veslovsky alone, and
one by both of them together. Meanwhile from the other side of the marsh
came the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shots, not frequent, but, as
Levin fancied, well-directed, for almost after each they heard "Krak,
Krak, _apporte_!"

This excited Levin still more. The snipe were floating continually in
the air over the reeds. Their whirring wings close to the earth, and
their harsh cries high in the air, could be heard on all sides; the
snipe that had risen first and flown up into the air, settled again
before the sportsmen. Instead of two hawks there were now dozens of them
hovering with shrill cries over the marsh.

After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and Veslovsky
reached the place where the peasants’ mowing-grass was divided into long
strips reaching to the reeds, marked off in one place by the trampled
grass, in another by a path mown through it. Half of these strips had
already been mown.

Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut part as
the cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to meet him, and so
he walked on with his companion through the cut and uncut patches.

Levin looked round.

"They invite you to have some vodka. Most likely they’ve been dividing
the meadow into lots. I should have some," said Levin, not without some
guile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka, and would go away
to them.

"You go, you go, you’ll find the way to the mill!" cried Levin, and
looking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky, bent and
stumbling with weariness, holding his gun out at arm’s length, was
making his way out of the marsh towards the peasants.

"You come too!" the peasants shouted to Levin. "Never fear! You taste
our cake!"

Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka and to eat some
bread. He was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to drag his
staggering legs out of the mire, and for a minute he hesitated. But
Laska was setting. And immediately all his weariness vanished, and he
walked lightly through the swamp towards the dog. A snipe flew up at his
feet; he fired and killed it. Laska still pointed.—"Fetch it!" Another
bird flew up close to the dog. Levin fired. But it was an unlucky day
for him; he missed it, and when he went to look for the one he had shot,
he could not find that either. He wandered all about the reeds, but
Laska did not believe he had shot it, and when he sent her to find it,
she pretended to hunt for it, but did not really. And in the absence of
Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of his failure, things went no
better. There were plenty of snipe still, but Levin made one miss after
another.

"How have you got on?" queried Levin. But there was no need to ask, for
he had already seen the full game bag.

When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant’s hut where Levin
always used to stay, Veslovsky was already there. He was sitting in the
middle of the hut, clinging with both hands to the bench from which he
was being pulled by a soldier, the brother of the peasant’s wife, who
was helping him off with his miry boots. Veslovsky was laughing his
infectious, good-humored laugh.

"I don’t understand you," said Levin, sitting up in the hay; "how is it
such people don’t disgust you? I can understand a lunch with Lafitte is
all very pleasant, but don’t you dislike just that very sumptuousness?
All these people, just like our spirit monopolists in old days, get
their money in a way that gains them the contempt of everyone. They
don’t care for their contempt, and then they use their dishonest gains
to buy off the contempt they have deserved."

"Not a bit of it." Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as he
spoke. "I simply don’t consider him more dishonest than any other
wealthy merchant or nobleman. They’ve all made their money alike—by
their work and their intelligence."

"Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery," said Levin, conscious
that he could not draw a distinct line between honesty and dishonesty.
"Such as banking, for instance," he went on. "It’s an evil—the amassing
of huge fortunes without labor, just the same thing as with the spirit
monopolies, it’s only the form that’s changed. _Le roi est mort, vive le
roi_. No sooner were the spirit monopolies abolished than the railways
came up, and banking companies; that, too, is profit without work."

"You say," Levin went on, "that it’s unjust for me to receive five
thousand, while the peasant has fifty; that’s true. It is unfair, and I
feel it, but..."

"Yes, you feel it, but you don’t give him your property," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking Levin.

"I don’t give it away, because no one demands that from me, and if I
wanted to, I could not give it away," answered Levin, "and have no one
to give it to."

"Yes, capital," answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of their
conversation just before. It seemed to him that he had clearly expressed
his thoughts and feelings to the best of his capacity, and yet both of
them, straightforward men and not fools, had said with one voice that he
was comforting himself with sophistries. This disconcerted him.

Levin did not answer. What they had said in the conversation, that he
acted justly only in a negative sense, absorbed his thoughts. "Can it be
that it’s only possible to be just negatively?" he was asking himself.

"No, I’m not coming," answered Levin.

"In what way? To go running after servant girls?" said Levin.

"Perhaps so," said Levin dryly, and he turned on his side. "Tomorrow,
early, I want to go shooting, and I won’t wake anyone, and shall set off
at daybreak."

Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on his slippers,
and lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon their voices were
lost.

For a long while Levin could not get to sleep. He heard the horses
munching hay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy getting ready
for the night, and going off for the night watch with the beasts, then
he heard the soldier arranging his bed on the other side of the barn,
with his nephew, the younger son of their peasant host. He heard the boy
in his shrill little voice telling his uncle what he thought about the
dogs, who seemed to him huge and terrible creatures, and asking what the
dogs were going to hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky, sleepy
voice, telling him the sportsmen were going in the morning to the marsh,
and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check the boy’s questions,
he said, "Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep, or you’ll catch it," and soon
after he began snoring himself, and everything was still. He could only
hear the snort of the horses, and the guttural cry of a snipe.

Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky and
Stepan Arkadyevitch. For an instant he opened his eyes: the moon was up,
and in the open doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight, they were
standing talking. Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying something of the
freshness of one girl, comparing her to a freshly peeled nut, and
Veslovsky with his infectious laugh was repeating some words, probably
said to him by a peasant: "Ah, you do your best to get round her!"
Levin, half asleep, said:

Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions.
Vassenka, lying on his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust out,
was sleeping so soundly that he could elicit no response. Oblonsky, half
asleep, declined to get up so early. Even Laska, who was asleep, curled
up in the hay, got up unwillingly, and lazily stretched out and
straightened her hind legs one after the other. Getting on his boots and
stockings, taking his gun, and carefully opening the creaking door of
the barn, Levin went out into the road. The coachmen were sleeping in
their carriages, the horses were dozing. Only one was lazily eating
oats, dipping its nose into the manger. It was still gray out-of-doors.

"Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and hemp
patches; there’s a little footpath." Stepping carefully with her
sunburnt, bare feet, the old woman conducted Levin, and moved back the
fence for him by the threshing floor.

Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path. Levin followed her with
a light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky. He hoped the sun
would not be up before he reached the marsh. But the sun did not delay.
The moon, which had been bright when he went out, by now shone only like
a crescent of quicksilver. The pink flush of dawn, which one could not
help seeing before, now had to be sought to be discerned at all. What
were before undefined, vague blurs in the distant countryside could now
be distinctly seen. They were sheaves of rye. The dew, not visible till
the sun was up, wetted Levin’s legs and his blouse above his belt in the
high growing, fragrant hemp patch, from which the pollen had already
fallen out. In the transparent stillness of morning the smallest sounds
were audible. A bee flew by Levin’s ear with the whizzing sound of a
bullet. He looked carefully, and saw a second and a third. They were all
flying from the beehives behind the hedge, and they disappeared over the
hemp patch in the direction of the marsh. The path led straight to the
marsh. The marsh could be recognized by the mist which rose from it,
thicker in one place and thinner in another, so that the reeds and
willow bushes swayed like islands in this mist. At the edge of the marsh
and the road, peasant boys and men, who had been herding for the night,
were lying, and in the dawn all were asleep under their coats. Not far
from them were three hobbled horses. One of them clanked a chain. Laska
walked beside her master, pressing a little forward and looking round.
Passing the sleeping peasants and reaching the first reeds, Levin
examined his pistols and let his dog off. One of the horses, a sleek,
dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started away, switched its
tail and snorted. The other horses too were frightened, and splashing
through the water with their hobbled legs, and drawing their hoofs out
of the thick mud with a squelching sound, they bounded out of the marsh.
Laska stopped, looking ironically at the horses and inquiringly at
Levin. Levin patted Laska, and whistled as a sign that she might begin.

Noticing Laska’s special attitude as she crouched on the ground, as it
were, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with her mouth
slightly open, Levin knew she was pointing at grouse, and with an inward
prayer for luck, especially with the first bird, he ran up to her.
Coming quite close up to her, he could from his height look beyond her,
and he saw with his eyes what she was seeing with her nose. In a space
between two little thickets, at a couple of yards’ distance, he could
see a grouse. Turning its head, it was listening. Then lightly preening
and folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner with a clumsy wag
of its tail.

"Fetch it, fetch it!" shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from behind.

Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry and
the peculiar round sound of its wings. And immediately after the shot it
splashed heavily with its white breast on the wet mire. Another bird did
not linger, but rose behind Levin without the dog. When Levin turned
towards it, it was already some way off. But his shot caught it. Flying
twenty paces further, the second grouse rose upwards, and whirling round
like a ball, dropped heavily on a dry place.

"Come, this is going to be some good!" thought Levin, packing the warm
and fat grouse into his game bag. "Eh, Laska, will it be good?"

When Levin, after loading his gun, moved on, the sun had fully risen,
though unseen behind the storm-clouds. The moon had lost all of its
luster, and was like a white cloud in the sky. Not a single star could
be seen. The sedge, silvery with dew before, now shone like gold. The
stagnant pools were all like amber. The blue of the grass had changed to
yellow-green. The marsh birds twittered and swarmed about the brook and
upon the bushes that glittered with dew and cast long shadows. A hawk
woke up and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to side and
looking discontentedly at the marsh. Crows were flying about the field,
and a bare-legged boy was driving the horses to an old man, who had got
up from under his long coat and was combing his hair. The smoke from the
gun was white as milk over the green of the grass.

One of the boys ran up to Levin.

And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed his
approval, at killing three snipe, one after another, straight off.

At ten o’clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of twenty
miles, returned to his night’s lodging with nineteen head of fine game
and one duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would not go into the
game bag. His companions had long been awake, and had had time to get
hungry and have breakfast.

"Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen," said Levin,
counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so much
less important now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with heads crooked
aside, than they did when they were flying.

The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s envy pleased Levin.
He was pleased too on returning to find the man sent by Kitty with a
note was already there.

"I am perfectly well and happy. If you were uneasy about me, you can
feel easier than ever. I’ve a new bodyguard, Marya Vlasyevna,"—this was
the midwife, a new and important personage in Levin’s domestic life.
"She has come to have a look at me. She found me perfectly well, and we
have kept her till you are back. All are happy and well, and please,
don’t be in a hurry to come back, but, if the sport is good, stay
another day."

These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter from his wife,
were so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents passed lightly
over Levin. One was that the chestnut trace horse, who had been
unmistakably overworked on the previous day, was off his feed and out of
sorts. The coachman said he was "Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch. Yes, indeed! driven ten miles with no sense!"

The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute destroyed his
good humor, though later he laughed at it a great deal, was to find that
of all the provisions Kitty had provided in such abundance that one
would have thought there was enough for a week, nothing was left. On his
way back, tired and hungry from shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision
of meat-pies that as he approached the hut he seemed to smell and taste
them, as Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told Philip to
give him some. It appeared that there were no pies left, nor even any
chicken.

"Well, it can’t be helped," said Levin, looking gloomily at Veslovsky.
"Well, Philip, give me some beef, then."

Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, "You might have
left me something!" and he felt ready to cry.

"Altogether, I’ve enjoyed our outing awfully. And you, Levin?"

"I have, very much," Levin said quite sincerely. It was particularly
delightful to him to have got rid of the hostility he had been feeling
towards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to feel instead the most
friendly disposition to him.

Next day at ten o’clock Levin, who had already gone his rounds, knocked
at the room where Vassenka had been put for the night.

"Don’t mind me, please." Levin sat down in the window. "Have you slept
well?"

After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even doing some
gymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars, Levin returned to the
house with his guest, and went with him into the drawing room.

"Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house," Levin
said to himself. Again he fancied something in the smile, in the
all-conquering air with which their guest addressed Kitty....

The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with Marya
Vlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and began
to talk to him about moving to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement, and
getting ready rooms for them. Just as Levin had disliked all the trivial
preparations for his wedding, as derogatory to the grandeur of the
event, now he felt still more offensive the preparations for the
approaching birth, the date of which they reckoned, it seemed, on their
fingers. He tried to turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best
patterns of long clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and
avoid seeing the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the triangles
of linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance. The
birth of a son (he was certain it would be a son) which was promised
him, but which he still could not believe in—so marvelous it
seemed—presented itself to his mind, on one hand, as a happiness so
immense, and therefore so incredible; on the other, as an event so
mysterious, that this assumption of a definite knowledge of what would
be, and consequent preparation for it, as for something ordinary that
did happen to people, jarred on him as confusing and humiliating.

But the princess did not understand his feelings, and put down his
reluctance to think and talk about it to carelessness and indifference,
and so she gave him no peace. She had commissioned Stepan Arkadyevitch
to look at a flat, and now she called Levin up.

There was something not nice in Vassenka’s attitude, in his eyes, in his
smile. Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty’s attitude and look.
And again the light died away in his eyes. Again, as before, all of a
sudden, without the slightest transition, he felt cast down from a
pinnacle of happiness, peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair,
rage, and humiliation. Again everything and everyone had become hateful
to him.

"Heavy is the cap of Monomach," Stepan Arkadyevitch said playfully,
hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess’s conversation, but at
the cause of Levin’s agitation, which he had noticed.

The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on the same
lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and whether love is
to be put higher than worldly considerations. Kitty disliked the
conversation, and she was disturbed both by the subject and the tone in
which it was conducted, and also by the knowledge of the effect it would
have on her husband. But she was too simple and innocent to know how to
cut short this conversation, or even to conceal the superficial pleasure
afforded her by the young man’s very obvious admiration. She wanted to
stop it, but she did not know what to do. Whatever she did she knew
would be observed by her husband, and the worst interpretation put on
it. And, in fact, when she asked Dolly what was wrong with Masha, and
Vassenka, waiting till this uninteresting conversation was over, began
to gaze indifferently at Dolly, the question struck Levin as an
unnatural and disgusting piece of hypocrisy.

The German would have left the room, but Levin said to him:

Levin did not answer him, but walked out himself with his wife.

After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly’s part of the
house. Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great distress too that
day. She was walking about the room, talking angrily to a little girl,
who stood in the corner roaring.

"Oh, she is a disgusting child!" she turned to Levin. "Where does she
get such wicked propensities?"

"Why, what has she done?" Levin said without much interest, for he had
wanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had come at an
unlucky moment.

"That proves nothing; it’s not a question of evil propensities at all,
it’s simply mischief," Levin assured her.

And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy for
him to say what he had meant to say.

"Yes, yes," said Levin gloomily; "but you noticed it?"

"Well, that’s all right then; now I’m satisfied. I’ll send him away,"
said Levin.

"Not a bit. I shall so enjoy it," Levin said, his eyes flashing with
real enjoyment. "Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won’t do it again," he
said of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny, but was standing
irresolutely before her mother, waiting and looking up from under her
brows to catch her mother’s eye.

"And what is there in common between us and him?" thought Levin, and he
went off to look for Veslovsky.

Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having unpacked
his things from his trunk, and laid out some new songs, was putting on
his gaiters to go out riding.

Whether there was something exceptional in Levin’s face, or that
Vassenka was himself conscious that _ce petit brin de cour_ he was
making was out of place in this family, but he was somewhat (as much as
a young man in society can be) disconcerted at Levin’s entrance.

He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry for him
and ashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy look on
Vassenka’s face.

On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together that
morning, trying their strength. Levin took the fragment in his hands and
began smashing it up, breaking bits off the stick, not knowing how to
begin.

"For you to drive to the station," Levin said gloomily.

"It happens that I expect visitors," said Levin, his strong fingers more
and more rapidly breaking off the ends of the split stick. "And I’m not
expecting visitors, and nothing has happened, but I beg you to go away.
You can explain my rudeness as you like."

"I can’t explain," Levin said softly and deliberately, trying to control
the trembling of his jaw; "and you’d better not ask."

And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin clutched the thick ends
in his finger, broke the stick in two, and carefully caught the end as
it fell.

The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.

"What madness is this?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, after hearing
from his friend that he was being turned out of the house, he found
Levin in the garden, where he was walking about waiting for his guest’s
departure. "_Mais c’est ridicule!_ What fly has stung you? _Mais c’est
du dernier ridicule!_ What did you think, if a young man..."

But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still sore, for
he turned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would have enlarged on
the reason, and he himself cut him short.

Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into the depths of the
avenue, and he went on walking up and down alone. Soon he heard the
rumble of the trap, and saw from behind the trees how Vassenka, sitting
in the hay (unluckily there was no seat in the trap) in his Scotch cap,
was driven along the avenue, jolting up and down over the ruts.

"What’s this?" Levin thought, when a footman ran out of the house and
stopped the trap. It was the mechanician, whom Levin had totally
forgotten. The mechanician, bowing low, said something to Veslovsky,
then clambered into the trap, and they drove off together.

Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin’s action.
And he himself felt not only in the highest degree _ridicule_, but also
utterly guilty and disgraced. But remembering what sufferings he and his
wife had been through, when he asked himself how he should act another
time, he answered that he should do just the same again.

In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone except the
princess, who could not pardon Levin’s action, became extraordinarily
lively and good humored, like children after a punishment or grown-up
people after a dreary, ceremonious reception, so that by the evening
Vassenka’s dismissal was spoken of, in the absence of the princess, as
though it were some remote event. And Dolly, who had inherited her
father’s gift of humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless with
laughter as she related for the third and fourth time, always with fresh
humorous additions, how she had only just put on her new shoes for the
benefit of the visitor, and on going into the drawing room, heard
suddenly the rumble of the trap. And who should be in the trap but
Vassenka himself, with his Scotch cap, and his songs and his gaiters,
and all, sitting in the hay.

Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see Anna. She
was sorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin disliked. She
quite understood how right the Levins were in not wishing to have
anything to do with Vronsky. But she felt she must go and see Anna, and
show her that her feelings could not be changed, in spite of the change
in her position. That she might be independent of the Levins in this
expedition, Darya Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses for
the drive; but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.

Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day fixed Levin had ready
for his sister-in-law a set of four horses and relays, getting them
together from the farm- and saddle-horses—not at all a smart-looking
set, but capable of taking Darya Alexandrovna the whole distance in a
single day. At that moment, when horses were wanted for the princess,
who was going, and for the midwife, it was a difficult matter for Levin
to make up the number, but the duties of hospitality would not let him
allow Darya Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in his house.
Moreover, he was well aware that the twenty roubles that would be asked
for the journey were a serious matter for her; Darya Alexandrovna’s
pecuniary affairs, which were in a very unsatisfactory state, were taken
to heart by the Levins as if they were their own.

Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin’s advice, started before daybreak. The road
was good, the carriage comfortable, the horses trotted along merrily,
and on the box, besides the coachman, sat the counting-house clerk, whom
Levin was sending instead of a groom for greater security. Darya
Alexandrovna dozed and waked up only on reaching the inn where the
horses were to be changed.

After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant’s with whom Levin had
stayed on the way to Sviazhsky’s, and chatting with the women about
their children, and with the old man about Count Vronsky, whom the
latter praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna, at ten o’clock, went on
again. At home, looking after her children, she had no time to think. So
now, after this journey of four hours, all the thoughts she had
suppressed before rushed swarming into her brain, and she thought over
all her life as she never had before, and from the most different points
of view. Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself. At first she
thought about the children, about whom she was uneasy, although the
princess and Kitty (she reckoned more upon her) had promised to look
after them. "If only Masha does not begin her naughty tricks, if Grisha
isn’t kicked by a horse, and Lily’s stomach isn’t upset again!" she
thought. But these questions of the present were succeeded by questions
of the immediate future. She began thinking how she had to get a new
flat in Moscow for the coming winter, to renew the drawing room
furniture, and to make her elder girl a cloak. Then questions of the
more remote future occurred to her: how she was to place her children in
the world. "The girls are all right," she thought; "but the boys?"

"And all this, what’s it for? What is to come of it all? That I’m
wasting my life, never having a moment’s peace, either with child, or
nursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched myself and
worrying others, repulsive to my husband, while the children are growing
up unhappy, badly educated, and penniless. Even now, if it weren’t for
spending the summer at the Levins’, I don’t know how we should be
managing to live. Of course Kostya and Kitty have so much tact that we
don’t feel it; but it can’t go on. They’ll have children, they won’t be
able to keep us; it’s a drag on them as it is. How is papa, who has
hardly anything left for himself, to help us? So that I can’t even bring
the children up by myself, and may find it hard with the help of other
people, at the cost of humiliation. Why, even if we suppose the greatest
good luck, that the children don’t die, and I bring them up somehow. At
the very best they’ll simply be decent people. That’s all I can hope
for. And to gain simply that—what agonies, what toil!... One’s whole
life ruined!" Again she recalled what the young peasant woman had said,
and again she was revolted at the thought; but she could not help
admitting that there was a grain of brutal truth in the words.

"Yes, she’s very tall," Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly, surprised
herself that she should respond so coolly about her children. "We are
having a delightful stay at the Levins’," she added.

"Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you will meet with us,"
she went on. "I’ll begin with the ladies. Princess Varvara—you know her,
and I know your opinion and Stiva’s about her. Stiva says the whole aim
of her existence is to prove her superiority over Auntie Katerina
Pavlovna: that’s all true; but she’s a good-natured woman, and I am so
grateful to her. In Petersburg there was a moment when a chaperon was
absolutely essential for me. Then she turned up. But really she is
good-natured. She did a great deal to alleviate my position. I see you
don’t understand all the difficulty of my position ... there in
Petersburg," she added. "Here I’m perfectly at ease and happy. Well, of
that later on, though. Then Sviazhsky—he’s the marshal of the district,
and he’s a very good sort of a man, but he wants to get something out of
Alexey. You understand, with his property, now that we are settled in
the country, Alexey can exercise great influence. Then there’s
Tushkevitch—you have seen him, you know—Betsy’s admirer. Now he’s been
thrown over and he’s come to see us. As Alexey says, he’s one of those
people who are very pleasant if one accepts them for what they try to
appear to be, _et puis il est comme il faut_, as Princess Varvara says.
Then Veslovsky ... you know him. A very nice boy," she said, and a sly
smile curved her lips. "What’s this wild story about him and the Levins?
Veslovsky told Alexey about it, and we don’t believe it. _Il est très
gentil et naïf_," she said again with the same smile. "Men need
occupation, and Alexey needs a circle, so I value all these people. We
have to have the house lively and gay, so that Alexey may not long for
any novelty. Then you’ll see the steward—a German, a very good fellow,
and he understands his work. Alexey has a very high opinion of him. Then
the doctor, a young man, not quite a Nihilist perhaps, but you know,
eats with his knife ... but a very good doctor. Then the architect....
_Une petite cour!_"

Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from Levin. He obviously
attached no significance to Veslovsky’s chattering; on the contrary, he
encouraged his jests.

The company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the architect,
and the steward, who remained plunged in gloomy silence, kept up a
conversation that never paused, glancing off one subject, fastening on
another, and at times stinging one or the other to the quick. Once Darya
Alexandrovna felt wounded to the quick, and got so hot that she
positively flushed and wondered afterwards whether she had said anything
extreme or unpleasant. Sviazhsky began talking of Levin, describing his
strange view that machinery is simply pernicious in its effects on
Russian agriculture.

"I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin," Vronsky said,
smiling, "but most likely he has never seen the machines he condemns; or
if he has seen and tried any, it must have been after a queer fashion,
some Russian imitation, not a machine from abroad. What sort of views
can anyone have on such a subject?"

It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely confident he
was of being right at his own table. She thought how Levin, who believed
the opposite, was just as positive in his opinions at his own table. But
she loved Levin, and so she was on his side.

Misinterpreting the look, she smiled to him. Next morning, in spite of
the protests of her hosts, Darya Alexandrovna prepared for her homeward
journey. Levin’s coachman, in his by no means new coat and shabby hat,
with his ill-matched horses and his coach with the patched mud-guards,
drove with gloomy determination into the covered gravel approach.

In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinsky
province, where were the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky, Koznishev,
Oblonsky, and a small part of Levin’s land.

In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement. He had spent
a whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey Ivanovitch, who
had property in the Kashinsky province, and took great interest in the
question of the approaching elections, made ready to set off to the
elections. He invited his brother, who had a vote in the Seleznevsky
district, to come with him. Levin had, moreover, to transact in Kashin
some extremely important business relating to the wardship of land and
to the receiving of certain redemption money for his sister, who was
abroad.

Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was bored in Moscow,
and urged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the proper
nobleman’s uniform, costing seven pounds. And that seven pounds paid for
the uniform was the chief cause that finally decided Levin to go. He
went to Kashin....

Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each day, and
busily engaged about his sister’s business, which still dragged on. The
district marshals of nobility were all occupied with the elections, and
it was impossible to get the simplest thing done that depended upon the
court of wardship. The other matter, the payment of the sums due, was
met too by difficulties. After long negotiations over the legal details,
the money was at last ready to be paid; but the notary, a most obliging
person, could not hand over the order, because it must have the
signature of the president, and the president, though he had not given
over his duties to a deputy, was at the elections. All these worrying
negotiations, this endless going from place to place, and talking with
pleasant and excellent people, who quite saw the unpleasantness of the
petitioner’s position, but were powerless to assist him—all these
efforts that yielded no result, led to a feeling of misery in Levin akin
to the mortifying helplessness one experiences in dreams when one tries
to use physical force. He felt this frequently as he talked to his most
good-natured solicitor. This solicitor did, it seemed, everything
possible, and strained every nerve to get him out of his difficulties.
"I tell you what you might try," he said more than once; "go to
so-and-so and so-and-so," and the solicitor drew up a regular plan for
getting round the fatal point that hindered everything. But he would add
immediately, "It’ll mean some delay, anyway, but you might try it." And
Levin did try, and did go. Everyone was kind and civil, but the point
evaded seemed to crop up again in the end, and again to bar the way.
What was particularly trying, was that Levin could not make out with
whom he was struggling, to whose interest it was that his business
should not be done. That no one seemed to know; the solicitor certainly
did not know. If Levin could have understood why, just as he saw why one
can only approach the booking office of a railway station in single
file, it would not have been so vexatious and tiresome to him. But with
the hindrances that confronted him in his business, no one could explain
why they existed.

But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage; he was patient,
and if he could not see why it was all arranged like this, he told
himself that he could not judge without knowing all about it, and that
most likely it must be so, and he tried not to fret.

In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them, he tried now
not to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to comprehend as fully as he
could the question which was so earnestly and ardently absorbing honest
and excellent men whom he respected. Since his marriage there had been
revealed to Levin so many new and serious aspects of life that had
previously, through his frivolous attitude to them, seemed of no
importance, that in the question of the elections too he assumed and
tried to find some serious significance.

Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and object of the
proposed revolution at the elections. The marshal of the province in
whose hands the law had placed the control of so many important public
functions—the guardianship of wards (the very department which was
giving Levin so much trouble just now), the disposal of large sums
subscribed by the nobility of the province, the high schools, female,
male, and military, and popular instruction on the new model, and
finally, the district council—the marshal of the province, Snetkov, was
a nobleman of the old school,—dissipating an immense fortune, a
good-hearted man, honest after his own fashion, but utterly without any
comprehension of the needs of modern days. He always took, in every
question, the side of the nobility; he was positively antagonistic to
the spread of popular education, and he succeeded in giving a purely
party character to the district council which ought by rights to be of
such an immense importance. What was needed was to put in his place a
fresh, capable, perfectly modern man, of contemporary ideas, and to
frame their policy so as from the rights conferred upon the nobles, not
as the nobility, but as an element of the district council, to extract
all the powers of self-government that could possibly be derived from
them. In the wealthy Kashinsky province, which always took the lead of
other provinces in everything, there was now such a preponderance of
forces that this policy, once carried through properly there, might
serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia. And hence the whole
question was of the greatest importance. It was proposed to elect as
marshal in place of Snetkov either Sviazhsky, or, better still,
Nevyedovsky, a former university professor, a man of remarkable
intelligence and a great friend of Sergey Ivanovitch.

When he had finished with his speech, the governor walked out of the
hall, and the noblemen noisily and eagerly—some even
enthusiastically—followed him and thronged round him while he put on his
fur coat and conversed amicably with the marshal of the province. Levin,
anxious to see into everything and not to miss anything, stood there too
in the crowd, and heard the governor say: "Please tell Marya Ivanovna my
wife is very sorry she couldn’t come to the Home." And thereupon the
nobles in high good-humor sorted out their fur coats and all drove off
to the cathedral.

In the cathedral Levin, lifting his hand like the rest and repeating the
words of the archdeacon, swore with most terrible oaths to do all the
governor had hoped they would do. Church services always affected Levin,
and as he uttered the words "I kiss the cross," and glanced round at the
crowd of young and old men repeating the same, he felt touched.

On the second and third days there was business relating to the finances
of the nobility and the female high school, of no importance whatever,
as Sergey Ivanovitch explained, and Levin, busy seeing after his own
affairs, did not attend the meetings. On the fourth day the auditing of
the marshal’s accounts took place at the high table of the marshal of
the province. And then there occurred the first skirmish between the new
party and the old. The committee who had been deputed to verify the
accounts reported to the meeting that all was in order. The marshal of
the province got up, thanked the nobility for their confidence, and shed
tears. The nobles gave him a loud welcome, and shook hands with him. But
at that instant a nobleman of Sergey Ivanovitch’s party said that he had
heard that the committee had not verified the accounts, considering such
a verification an insult to the marshal of the province. One of the
members of the committee incautiously admitted this. Then a small
gentleman, very young-looking but very malignant, began to say that it
would probably be agreeable to the marshal of the province to give an
account of his expenditures of the public moneys, and that the misplaced
delicacy of the members of the committee was depriving him of this moral
satisfaction. Then the members of the committee tried to withdraw their
admission, and Sergey Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logically
admit either that they had verified the accounts or that they had not,
and he developed this dilemma in detail. Sergey Ivanovitch was answered
by the spokesman of the opposite party. Then Sviazhsky spoke, and then
the malignant gentleman again. The discussion lasted a long time and
ended in nothing. Levin was surprised that they should dispute upon this
subject so long, especially as, when he asked Sergey Ivanovitch whether
he supposed that money had been misappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitch
answered:

But the division into young and old did not correspond with the division
of parties. Some of the young men, as Levin observed, belonged to the
old party; and some of the very oldest noblemen, on the contrary, were
whispering with Sviazhsky, and were evidently ardent partisans of the
new party.

Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and taking
light refreshments, close to his own friends, and listening to what they
were saying, he conscientiously exerted all his intelligence trying to
understand what was said. Sergey Ivanovitch was the center round which
the others grouped themselves. He was listening at that moment to
Sviazhsky and Hliustov, the marshal of another district, who belonged to
their party. Hliustov would not agree to go with his district to ask
Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading him to do so, and
Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan. Levin could not make out
why the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom they wanted to
supersede.

"One district’s enough, and Sviazhsky’s obviously of the opposition," he
said, words evidently intelligible to all except Levin.

"Why, Kostya, you here too! I suppose you’re converted, eh?" he added,
turning to Levin and drawing his arm through his. Levin would have been
glad indeed to be converted, but could not make out what the point was,
and retreating a few steps from the speakers, he explained to Stepan
Arkadyevitch his inability to understand why the marshal of the province
should be asked to stand.

_"O sancta simplicitas!"_ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and briefly and
clearly he explained it to Levin. If, as at previous elections, all the
districts asked the marshal of the province to stand, then he would be
elected without a ballot. That must not be. Now eight districts had
agreed to call upon him: if two refused to do so, Snetkov might decline
to stand at all; and then the old party might choose another of their
party, which would throw them completely out in their reckoning. But if
only one district, Sviazhsky’s, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkov
would let himself be balloted for. They were even, some of them, going
to vote for him, and purposely to let him get a good many votes, so that
the enemy might be thrown off the scent, and when a candidate of the
other side was put up, they too might give him some votes. Levin
understood to some extent, but not fully, and would have put a few more
questions, when suddenly everyone began talking and making a noise and
they moved towards the big room.

"What is it? eh? whom?" "No guarantee? whose? what?" "They won’t pass
him?" "No guarantee?" "They won’t let Flerov in?" "Eh, because of the
charge against him?" "Why, at this rate, they won’t admit anyone. It’s a
swindle!" "The law!" Levin heard exclamations on all sides, and he moved
into the big room together with the others, all hurrying somewhere and
afraid of missing something. Squeezed by the crowding noblemen, he drew
near the high table where the marshal of the province, Sviazhsky, and
the other leaders were hotly disputing about something.

Levin was standing rather far off. A nobleman breathing heavily and
hoarsely at his side, and another whose thick boots were creaking,
prevented him from hearing distinctly. He could only hear the soft voice
of the marshal faintly, then the shrill voice of the malignant
gentleman, and then the voice of Sviazhsky. They were disputing, as far
as he could make out, as to the interpretation to be put on the act and
the exact meaning of the words: "liable to be called up for trial."

"A ballot! A ballot! Every nobleman sees it! We shed our blood for our
country!... The confidence of the monarch.... No checking the accounts
of the marshal; he’s not a cashier.... But that’s not the point....
Votes, please! Beastly!..." shouted furious and violent voices on all
sides. Looks and faces were even more violent and furious than their
words. They expressed the most implacable hatred. Levin did not in the
least understand what was the matter, and he marveled at the passion
with which it was disputed whether or not the decision about Flerov
should be put to the vote. He forgot, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained to
him afterwards, this syllogism: that it was necessary for the public
good to get rid of the marshal of the province; that to get rid of the
marshal it was necessary to have a majority of votes; that to get a
majority of votes it was necessary to secure Flerov’s right to vote;
that to secure the recognition of Flerov’s right to vote they must
decide on the interpretation to be put on the act.

"And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be serious and
consecutive, if one wants to be of use in public life," concluded Sergey
Ivanovitch. But Levin forgot all that, and it was painful to him to see
all these excellent persons, for whom he had a respect, in such an
unpleasant and vicious state of excitement. To escape from this painful
feeling he went away into the other room where there was nobody except
the waiters at the refreshment bar. Seeing the waiters busy over washing
up the crockery and setting in order their plates and wine glasses,
seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an unexpected sense of
relief as though he had come out of a stuffy room into the fresh air. He
began walking up and down, looking with pleasure at the waiters. He
particularly liked the way one gray-whiskered waiter, who showed his
scorn for the other younger ones and was jeered at by them, was teaching
them how to fold up napkins properly. Levin was just about to enter into
conversation with the old waiter, when the secretary of the court of
wardship, a little old man whose specialty it was to know all the
noblemen of the province by name and patronymic, drew him away.

Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed his
brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was standing
with a significant and ironical face, holding his beard in his fist and
sniffing at it. Sergey Ivanovitch put his hand into the box, put the
ball somewhere, and making room for Levin, stopped. Levin advanced, but
utterly forgetting what he was to do, and much embarrassed, he turned to
Sergey Ivanovitch with the question, "Where am I to put it?" He asked
this softly, at a moment when there was talking going on near, so that
he had hoped his question would not be overheard. But the persons
speaking paused, and his improper question was overheard. Sergey
Ivanovitch frowned.

Several people smiled. Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust his hand under
the cloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in his right hand.
Having put it in, he recollected that he ought to have thrust his left
hand too, and so he thrust it in though too late, and, still more
overcome with confusion, he beat a hasty retreat into the background.

But the old party did not consider themselves conquered. Levin heard
that they were asking Snetkov to stand, and he saw that a crowd of
noblemen was surrounding the marshal, who was saying something. Levin
went nearer. In reply Snetkov spoke of the trust the noblemen of the
province had placed in him, the affection they had shown him, which he
did not deserve, as his only merit had been his attachment to the
nobility, to whom he had devoted twelve years of service. Several times
he repeated the words: "I have served to the best of my powers with
truth and good faith, I value your goodness and thank you," and suddenly
he stopped short from the tears that choked him, and went out of the
room. Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice being done
him, from his love for the nobility, or from the strain of the position
he was placed in, feeling himself surrounded by enemies, his emotion
infected the assembly, the majority were touched, and Levin felt a
tenderness for Snetkov.

In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.

"Beg pardon, excuse me, please," he said as to a stranger, but
recognizing Levin, he smiled timidly. It seemed to Levin that he would
have liked to say something, but could not speak for emotion. His face
and his whole figure in his uniform with the crosses, and white trousers
striped with braid, as he moved hurriedly along, reminded Levin of some
hunted beast who sees that he is in evil case. This expression in the
marshal’s face was particularly touching to Levin, because, only the day
before, he had been at his house about his trustee business and had seen
him in all his grandeur, a kind-hearted, fatherly man. The big house
with the old family furniture; the rather dirty, far from stylish, but
respectful footmen, unmistakably old house serfs who had stuck to their
master; the stout, good-natured wife in a cap with lace and a Turkish
shawl, petting her pretty grandchild, her daughter’s daughter; the young
son, a sixth form high school boy, coming home from school, and greeting
his father, kissing his big hand; the genuine, cordial words and
gestures of the old man—all this had the day before roused an
instinctive feeling of respect and sympathy in Levin. This old man was a
touching and pathetic figure to Levin now, and he longed to say
something pleasant to him.

Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he did not want to
join his own friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch,
Sviazhsky and the rest, because Vronsky in his equerry’s uniform was
standing with them in eager conversation. Levin had seen him already at
the meeting on the previous day, and he had studiously avoided him, not
caring to greet him. He went to the window and sat down, scanning the
groups, and listening to what was being said around him. He felt
depressed, especially because everyone else was, as he saw, eager,
anxious, and interested, and he alone, with an old, toothless little man
with mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, sitting beside him, had no
interest in it and nothing to do.

"He’s such a blackguard! I have told him so, but it makes no difference.
Only think of it! He couldn’t collect it in three years!" he heard
vigorously uttered by a round-shouldered, short, country gentleman, who
had pomaded hair hanging on his embroidered collar, and new boots
obviously put on for the occasion, with heels that tapped energetically
as he spoke. Casting a displeased glance at Levin, this gentleman
sharply turned his back.

Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen, surrounding a stout general,
hurriedly came near Levin. These persons were unmistakably seeking a
place where they could talk without being overheard.

"I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for she can
never save a profit," he heard a pleasant voice say. The speaker was a
country gentleman with gray whiskers, wearing the regimental uniform of
an old general staff-officer. It was the very landowner Levin had met at
Sviazhsky’s. He knew him at once. The landowner too stared at Levin, and
they exchanged greetings.

"Well, and how is your land doing?" asked Levin.

"I ought to own that I don’t very well understand the drift of the
provincial elections," said Levin.

"Then why do you come?" asked Levin.

"Yes, yes," said Levin, "that’s perfectly true. I always feel there’s no
real balance of gain in my work on the land, and yet one does it....
It’s a sort of duty one feels to the land."

"And with what he made he’d increase his stock, or buy some land for a
trifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants," Levin added, smiling.
He had evidently more than once come across those commercial
calculations. "And he’d make his fortune. But you and I must thank God
if we keep what we’ve got and leave it to our children."

"Yes," Levin answered, with proud satisfaction. "Yes, it’s rather
strange," he went on. "So we live without making anything, as though we
were ancient vestals set to keep in a fire."

"But why is it we don’t do like the merchants? Why don’t we cut down our
parks for timber?" said Levin, returning to a thought that had struck
him.

"Just as we do," said Levin. "Very, very glad to have met you," he
added, seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.

Sviazhsky took Levin’s arm, and went with him to his own friends. This
time there was no avoiding Vronsky. He was standing with Stepan
Arkadyevitch and Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight at Levin as he
drew near.

"Delighted! I believe I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you ... at
Princess Shtcherbatskaya’s," he said, giving Levin his hand.

"Yes, I quite remember our meeting," said Levin, and blushing crimson,
he turned away immediately, and began talking to his brother.

With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky, obviously
without the slightest inclination to enter into conversation with Levin.
But Levin, as he talked to his brother, was continually looking round at
Vronsky, trying to think of something to say to him to gloss over his
rudeness.

"What are we waiting for now?" asked Levin, looking at Sviazhsky and
Vronsky.

"And if he refuses, who will stand then?" asked Levin, looking at
Vronsky.

"Shall you?" asked Levin.

"Who then? Nevyedovsky?" said Levin, feeling he was putting his foot
into it.

This was Nevyedovsky himself. Sviazhsky introduced him to Levin.

A silence followed, during which Vronsky—since he had to look at
something—looked at Levin, at his feet, at his uniform, then at his
face, and noticing his gloomy eyes fixed upon him, he said, in order to
say something:

"It’s because I consider that the justice of the peace is a silly
institution," Levin answered gloomily. He had been all the time looking
for an opportunity to enter into conversation with Vronsky, so as to
smooth over his rudeness at their first meeting.

"It’s a plaything," Levin cut him short. "We don’t want justices of the
peace. I’ve never had a single thing to do with them during eight years.
And what I have had was decided wrongly by them. The justice of the
peace is over thirty miles from me. For some matter of two roubles I
should have to send a lawyer, who costs me fifteen."

And he related how a peasant had stolen some flour from the miller, and
when the miller told him of it, had lodged a complaint for slander. All
this was utterly uncalled for and stupid, and Levin felt it himself as
he said it.

"Oh, I don’t understand it at all! And it’s all such nonsense," Levin
answered gloomily.

Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.

"Put it in the right side," whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as with his
brother Levin followed the marshal of his district to the table. But
Levin had forgotten by now the calculations that had been explained to
him, and was afraid Stepan Arkadyevitch might be mistaken in saying "the
right side." Surely Snetkov was the enemy. As he went up, he held the
ball in his right hand, but thinking he was wrong, just at the box he
changed to the left hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left. An
adept in the business, standing at the box and seeing by the mere action
of the elbow where each put his ball, scowled with annoyance. It was no
good for him to use his insight.

"Well, now is it over?" Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

Levin had quite forgotten about that. Now he could only remember that
there was some sort of trickery in it, but he was too bored to think
what it was exactly. He felt depressed, and longed to get out of the
crowd.

As no one was paying any attention to him, and no one apparently needed
him, he quietly slipped away into the little room where the refreshments
were, and again had a great sense of comfort when he saw the waiters.
The little old waiter pressed him to have something, and Levin agreed.
After eating a cutlet with beans and talking to the waiters of their
former masters, Levin, not wishing to go back to the hall, where it was
all so distasteful to him, proceeded to walk through the galleries. The
galleries were full of fashionably dressed ladies, leaning over the
balustrade and trying not to lose a single word of what was being said
below. With the ladies were sitting and standing smart lawyers, high
school teachers in spectacles, and officers. Everywhere they were
talking of the election, and of how worried the marshal was, and how
splendid the discussions had been. In one group Levin heard his
brother’s praises. One lady was telling a lawyer:

Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began looking
and listening.

Again it began, and again "Declined." And so it went on for about an
hour. Levin, with his elbows on the balustrade, looked and listened. At
first he wondered and wanted to know what it meant; then feeling sure
that he could not make it out he began to be bored. Then recalling all
the excitement and vindictiveness he had seen on all the faces, he felt
sad; he made up his mind to go, and went downstairs. As he passed
through the entry to the galleries he met a dejected high school boy
walking up and down with tired-looking eyes. On the stairs he met a
couple—a lady running quickly on her high heels and the jaunty deputy
prosecutor.

"I told you you weren’t late," the deputy prosecutor was saying at the
moment when Levin moved aside to let the lady pass.

Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in his
waistcoat pocket for the number of his overcoat, when the secretary
overtook him.

The candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so stoutly
denied all idea of standing. Levin went up to the door of the room; it
was locked. The secretary knocked, the door opened, and Levin was met by
two red-faced gentlemen, who darted out.

The Levins had been three months in Moscow. The date had long passed on
which, according to the most trustworthy calculations of people learned
in such matters, Kitty should have been confined. But she was still
about, and there was nothing to show that her time was any nearer than
two months ago. The doctor, the monthly nurse, and Dolly and her mother,
and most of all Levin, who could not think of the approaching event
without terror, began to be impatient and uneasy. Kitty was the only
person who felt perfectly calm and happy.

Levin flushed a great deal more than she when she told him she had met
Vronsky at Princess Marya Borissovna’s. It was very hard for her to tell
him this, but still harder to go on speaking of the details of the
meeting, as he did not question her, but simply gazed at her with a
frown.

The truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisfied with herself, and in
spite of her blushing he was quickly reassured and began questioning
her, which was all she wanted. When he had heard everything, even to the
detail that for the first second she could not help flushing, but that
afterwards she was just as direct and as much at her ease as with any
chance acquaintance, Levin was quite happy again and said he was glad of
it, and would not now behave as stupidly as he had done at the election,
but would try the first time he met Vronsky to be as friendly as
possible.

"It’s so wretched to feel that there’s a man almost an enemy whom it’s
painful to meet," said Levin. "I’m very, very glad."

"I am only going to Katavasov," answered Levin.

"He promised to introduce me to Metrov. I wanted to talk to him about my
work. He’s a distinguished scientific man from Petersburg," said Levin.

"Why, what can we do?" said Levin.

On the steps Levin was stopped by his old servant Kouzma, who had been
with him before his marriage, and now looked after their household in
town.

During the first part of their stay in Moscow, Levin had used his own
horses brought up from the country. He had tried to arrange this part of
their expenses in the best and cheapest way possible; but it appeared
that their own horses came dearer than hired horses, and they still
hired too.

Levin was not by now struck as he had been at first by the fact that to
get from one end of Moscow to the other he had to have two powerful
horses put into a heavy carriage, to take the carriage three miles
through the snowy slush and to keep it standing there four hours, paying
five roubles every time.

And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of town life, Levin
settled a question which, in the country, would have called for so much
personal trouble and exertion, and going out onto the steps, he called a
sledge, sat down, and drove to Nikitsky. On the way he thought no more
of money, but mused on the introduction that awaited him to the
Petersburg savant, a writer on sociology, and what he would say to him
about his book.

Only during the first days of his stay in Moscow Levin had been struck
by the expenditure, strange to one living in the country, unproductive
but inevitable, that was expected of him on every side. But by now he
had grown used to it. That had happened to him in this matter which is
said to happen to drunkards—the first glass sticks in the throat, the
second flies down like a hawk, but after the third they’re like tiny
little birds. When Levin had changed his first hundred-rouble note to
pay for liveries for his footmen and hall-porter he could not help
reflecting that these liveries were of no use to anyone—but they were
indubitably necessary, to judge by the amazement of the princess and
Kitty when he suggested that they might do without liveries,—that these
liveries would cost the wages of two laborers for the summer, that is,
would pay for about three hundred working days from Easter to Ash
Wednesday, and each a day of hard work from early morning to late
evening—and that hundred-rouble note did stick in his throat. But the
next note, changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations,
that cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin the
reflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine measures of oats, which
men would with groans and sweat have reaped and bound and thrashed and
winnowed and sifted and sown,—this next one he parted with more easily.
And now the notes he changed no longer aroused such reflections, and
they flew off like little birds. Whether the labor devoted to obtaining
the money corresponded to the pleasure given by what was bought with it,
was a consideration he had long ago dismissed. His business calculation
that there was a certain price below which he could not sell certain
grain was forgotten too. The rye, for the price of which he had so long
held out, had been sold for fifty kopecks a measure cheaper than it had
been fetching a month ago. Even the consideration that with such an
expenditure he could not go on living for a year without debt, that even
had no force. Only one thing was essential: to have money in the bank,
without inquiring where it came from, so as to know that one had the
wherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow. And this condition had hitherto
been fulfilled; he had always had the money in the bank. But now the
money in the bank had gone, and he could not quite tell where to get the
next installment. And this it was which, at the moment when Kitty had
mentioned money, had disturbed him; but he had no time to think about
it. He drove off, thinking of Katavasov and the meeting with Metrov that
was before him.

Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of his old friend at
the university, Professor Katavasov, whom he had not seen since his
marriage. He liked in Katavasov the clearness and simplicity of his
conception of life. Levin thought that the clearness of Katavasov’s
conception of life was due to the poverty of his nature; Katavasov
thought that the disconnectedness of Levin’s ideas was due to his lack
of intellectual discipline; but Levin enjoyed Katavasov’s clearness, and
Katavasov enjoyed the abundance of Levin’s untrained ideas, and they
liked to meet and to discuss.

Levin had read Katavasov some parts of his book, and he had liked them.
On the previous day Katavasov had met Levin at a public lecture and told
him that the celebrated Metrov, whose article Levin had so much liked,
was in Moscow, that he had been much interested by what Katavasov had
told him about Levin’s work, and that he was coming to see him tomorrow
at eleven, and would be very glad to make Levin’s acquaintance.

"You’re positively a reformed character, I’m glad to see," said
Katavasov, meeting Levin in the little drawing room. "I heard the bell
and thought: Impossible that it can be he at the exact time!... Well,
what do you say to the Montenegrins now? They’re a race of warriors."

"Why, what’s happened?" asked Levin.

Katavasov in a few words told him the last piece of news from the war,
and going into his study, introduced Levin to a short, thick-set man of
pleasant appearance. This was Metrov. The conversation touched for a
brief space on politics and on how recent events were looked at in the
higher spheres in Petersburg. Metrov repeated a saying that had reached
him through a most trustworthy source, reported as having been uttered
on this subject by the Tsar and one of the ministers. Katavasov had
heard also on excellent authority that the Tsar had said something quite
different. Levin tried to imagine circumstances in which both sayings
might have been uttered, and the conversation on that topic dropped.

"What I began precisely was to write a book on agriculture; but studying
the chief instrument of agriculture, the laborer," said Levin,
reddening, "I could not help coming to quite unexpected results."

And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling his ground, to expound
his views. He knew Metrov had written an article against the generally
accepted theory of political economy, but to what extent he could reckon
on his sympathy with his own new views he did not know and could not
guess from the clever and serene face of the learned man.

Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this question with which he
did not agree. But he went on explaining his own idea that the Russian
laborer has a quite special view of the land, different from that of
other people; and to support this proposition he made haste to add that
in his opinion this attitude of the Russian peasant was due to the
consciousness of his vocation to people vast unoccupied expanses in the
East.

"One may easily be led into error in basing any conclusion on the
general vocation of a people," said Metrov, interrupting Levin. "The
condition of the laborer will always depend on his relation to the land
and to capital."

And without letting Levin finish explaining his idea, Metrov began
expounding to him the special point of his own theory.

In what the point of his theory lay, Levin did not understand, because
he did not take the trouble to understand. He saw that Metrov, like
other people, in spite of his own article, in which he had attacked the
current theory of political economy, looked at the position of the
Russian peasant simply from the point of view of capital, wages, and
rent. He would indeed have been obliged to admit that in the
eastern—much the larger—part of Russia rent was as yet nil, that for
nine-tenths of the eighty millions of the Russian peasants wages took
the form simply of food provided for themselves, and that capital does
not so far exist except in the form of the most primitive tools. Yet it
was only from that point of view that he considered every laborer,
though in many points he differed from the economists and had his own
theory of the wage-fund, which he expounded to Levin.

Levin listened reluctantly, and at first made objections. He would have
liked to interrupt Metrov, to explain his own thought, which in his
opinion would have rendered further exposition of Metrov’s theories
superfluous. But later on, feeling convinced that they looked at the
matter so differently, that they could never understand one another, he
did not even oppose his statements, but simply listened. Although what
Metrov was saying was by now utterly devoid of interest for him, he yet
experienced a certain satisfaction in listening to him. It flattered his
vanity that such a learned man should explain his ideas to him so
eagerly, with such intensity and confidence in Levin’s understanding of
the subject, sometimes with a mere hint referring him to a whole aspect
of the subject. He put this down to his own credit, unaware that Metrov,
who had already discussed his theory over and over again with all his
intimate friends, talked of it with special eagerness to every new
person, and in general was eager to talk to anyone of any subject that
interested him, even if still obscure to himself.

"Yes, there’s a meeting of the Society of Amateurs today in
commemoration of the jubilee of Svintitch," said Katavasov in answer to
Levin’s inquiry. "Pyotr Ivanovitch and I were going. I’ve promised to
deliver an address on his labors in zoology. Come along with us, it’s
very interesting."

One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the opposite party a
scoundrelly betrayal and treachery, while the opposite party saw in them
childishness and lack of respect for the authorities. Levin, though he
did not belong to the university, had several times already during his
stay in Moscow heard and talked about this matter, and had his own
opinion on the subject. He took part in the conversation that was
continued in the street, as they all three walked to the buildings of
the old university.

The meeting had already begun. Round the cloth-covered table, at which
Katavasov and Metrov seated themselves, there were some half-dozen
persons, and one of these was bending close over a manuscript, reading
something aloud. Levin sat down in one of the empty chairs that were
standing round the table, and in a whisper asked a student sitting near
what was being read. The student, eyeing Levin with displeasure, said:

Though Levin was not interested in the biography, he could not help
listening, and learned some new and interesting facts about the life of
the distinguished man of science.

When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at his watch, saw it was past
one, and thought that there would not be time before the concert to read
Metrov his book, and indeed, he did not now care to do so. During the
reading he had thought over their conversation. He saw distinctly now
that though Metrov’s ideas might perhaps have value, his own ideas had a
value too, and their ideas could only be made clear and lead to
something if each worked separately in his chosen path, and that nothing
would be gained by putting their ideas together. And having made up his
mind to refuse Metrov’s invitation, Levin went up to him at the end of
the meeting. Metrov introduced Levin to the chairman, with whom he was
talking of the political news. Metrov told the chairman what he had
already told Levin, and Levin made the same remarks on his news that he
had already made that morning, but for the sake of variety he expressed
also a new opinion which had only just struck him. After that the
conversation turned again on the university question. As Levin had
already heard it all, he made haste to tell Metrov that he was sorry he
could not take advantage of his invitation, took leave, and drove to
Lvov’s.

In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views and the fact
that Lvov was older than Levin, they had seen a great deal of one
another that winter, and had taken a great liking to each other.

Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to him unannounced.

His handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face, to which his
curly, glistening silvery hair gave a still more aristocratic air,
lighted up with a smile when he saw Levin.

Levin told him what he had heard from Katavasov was being said in
Petersburg, and after talking a little about politics, he told him of
his interview with Metrov, and the learned society’s meeting. To Lvov it
was very interesting.

"That I don’t believe," said Levin with a smile, feeling, as he always
did, touched at Lvov’s low opinion of himself, which was not in the
least put on from a desire to seem or to be modest, but was absolutely
sincere.

Levin tried to explain to him that it couldn’t be understood, but that
it had to be taught; but Lvov would not agree with him.

"All I know," said Levin, "is that I have never seen better brought-up
children than yours, and I wouldn’t wish for children better than
yours."

This subject, which always interested Levin, was cut short by the
entrance of the beauty Natalia Alexandrovna, dressed to go out.

And the husband and wife began to discuss their arrangements for the
day. As the husband had to drive to meet someone on official business,
while the wife had to go to the concert and some public meeting of a
committee on the Eastern Question, there was a great deal to consider
and settle. Levin had to take part in their plans as one of themselves.
It was settled that Levin should go with Natalia to the concert and the
meeting, and that from there they should send the carriage to the office
for Arseny, and he should call for her and take her to Kitty’s; or that,
if he had not finished his work, he should send the carriage back and
Levin would go with her.

"Well, come here, you perfect children," Lvov said to the two handsome
boys who came in, and after bowing to Levin, went up to their father,
obviously wishing to ask him about something.

Levin would have liked to talk to them, to hear what they would say to
their father, but Natalia began talking to him, and then Lvov’s
colleague in the service, Mahotin, walked in, wearing his court uniform,
to go with him to meet someone, and a conversation was kept up without a
break upon Herzegovina, Princess Korzinskaya, the town council, and the
sudden death of Madame Apraksina.

Levin even forgot the commission intrusted to him. He recollected it as
he was going into the hall.

"Oh, Kitty told me to talk to you about Oblonsky," he said, as Lvov was
standing on the stairs, seeing his wife and Levin off.

At the concert in the afternoon two very interesting things were
performed. One was a fantasia, _King Lear;_ the other was a quartette
dedicated to the memory of Bach. Both were new and in the new style, and
Levin was eager to form an opinion of them. After escorting his
sister-in-law to her stall, he stood against a column and tried to
listen as attentively and conscientiously as possible. He tried not to
let his attention be distracted, and not to spoil his impression by
looking at the conductor in a white tie, waving his arms, which always
disturbed his enjoyment of music so much, or the ladies in bonnets, with
strings carefully tied over their ears, and all these people either
thinking of nothing at all or thinking of all sorts of things except the
music. He tried to avoid meeting musical connoisseurs or talkative
acquaintances, and stood looking at the floor straight before him,
listening.

During the whole of the performance Levin felt like a deaf man watching
people dancing, and was in a state of complete bewilderment when the
fantasia was over, and felt a great weariness from the fruitless strain
on his attention. Loud applause resounded on all sides. Everyone got up,
moved about, and began talking. Anxious to throw some light on his own
perplexity from the impressions of others, Levin began to walk about,
looking for connoisseurs, and was glad to see a well-known musical
amateur in conversation with Pestsov, whom he knew.

"You mean ... what has Cordelia to do with it?" Levin asked timidly,
forgetting that the fantasia was supposed to represent King Lear.

"Cordelia comes in ... see here!" said Pestsov, tapping his finger on
the satiny surface of the program he held in his hand and passing it to
Levin.

Only then Levin recollected the title of the fantasia, and made haste to
read in the Russian translation the lines from Shakespeare that were
printed on the back of the program.

"You can’t follow it without that," said Pestsov, addressing Levin, as
the person he had been speaking to had gone away, and he had no one to
talk to.

In the _entr’acte_ Levin and Pestsov fell into an argument upon the
merits and defects of music of the Wagner school. Levin maintained that
the mistake of Wagner and all his followers lay in their trying to take
music into the sphere of another art, just as poetry goes wrong when it
tries to paint a face as the art of painting ought to do, and as an
instance of this mistake he cited the sculptor who carved in marble
certain poetic phantasms flitting round the figure of the poet on the
pedestal. "These phantoms were so far from being phantoms that they were
positively clinging on the ladder," said Levin. The comparison pleased
him, but he could not remember whether he had not used the same phrase
before, and to Pestsov, too, and as he said it he felt confused.

The second piece that was performed Levin could not hear. Pestsov, who
was standing beside him, was talking to him almost all the time,
condemning the music for its excessive affected assumption of
simplicity, and comparing it with the simplicity of the Pre-Raphaelites
in painting. As he went out Levin met many more acquaintances, with whom
he talked of politics, of music, and of common acquaintances. Among
others he met Count Bol, whom he had utterly forgotten to call upon.

"Perhaps they’re not at home?" said Levin, as he went into the hall of
Countess Bola’s house.

"How annoying!" thought Levin with a sigh, taking off one glove and
stroking his hat. "What did I come for? What have I to say to them?"

As he passed through the first drawing room Levin met in the doorway
Countess Bola, giving some order to a servant with a care-worn and
severe face. On seeing Levin she smiled, and asked him to come into the
little drawing room, where he heard voices. In this room there were
sitting in armchairs the two daughters of the countess, and a Moscow
colonel, whom Levin knew. Levin went up, greeted them, and sat down
beside the sofa with his hat on his knees.

"Yes, I heard.... What a sudden death!" said Levin.

Levin answered, and repeated an inquiry about Madame Apraksina’s sudden
death.

"Yes, very good," he said, and as it was utterly of no consequence to
him what they thought of him, he began repeating what they had heard a
hundred times about the characteristics of the singer’s talent. Countess
Bola pretended to be listening. Then, when he had said enough and
paused, the colonel, who had been silent till then, began to talk. The
colonel too talked of the opera, and about culture. At last, after
speaking of the proposed _folle journée_ at Turin’s, the colonel
laughed, got up noisily, and went away. Levin too rose, but he saw by
the face of the countess that it was not yet time for him to go. He must
stay two minutes longer. He sat down.

"No, I promised my _belle-soeur_ to fetch her from it," said Levin.

"Well, now I think the time has come," thought Levin, and he got up. The
ladies shook hands with him, and begged him to say _mille choses_ to his
wife for them.

"Of course I don’t care, but still I feel ashamed and awfully stupid,"
thought Levin, consoling himself with the reflection that everyone does
it. He drove to the public meeting, where he was to find his
sister-in-law, so as to drive home with her.

At the public meeting of the committee there were a great many people,
and almost all the highest society. Levin was in time for the report
which, as everyone said, was very interesting. When the reading of the
report was over, people moved about, and Levin met Sviazhsky, who
invited him very pressingly to come that evening to a meeting of the
Society of Agriculture, where a celebrated lecture was to be delivered,
and Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had only just come from the races, and many
other acquaintances; and Levin heard and uttered various criticisms on
the meeting, on the new fantasia, and on a public trial. But, probably
from the mental fatigue he was beginning to feel, he made a blunder in
speaking of the trial, and this blunder he recalled several times with
vexation. Speaking of the sentence upon a foreigner who had been
condemned in Russia, and of how unfair it would be to punish him by
exile abroad, Levin repeated what he had heard the day before in
conversation from an acquaintance.

"I think sending him abroad is much the same as punishing a carp by
putting it into the water," said Levin. Then he recollected that this
idea, which he had heard from an acquaintance and uttered as his own,
came from a fable of Krilov’s, and that the acquaintance had picked it
up from a newspaper article.

After driving home with his sister-in-law, and finding Kitty in good
spirits and quite well, Levin drove to the club.

Levin reached the club just at the right time. Members and visitors were
driving up as he arrived. Levin had not been at the club for a very long
while—not since he lived in Moscow, when he was leaving the university
and going into society. He remembered the club, the external details of
its arrangement, but he had completely forgotten the impression it had
made on him in old days. But as soon as, driving into the wide
semicircular court and getting out of the sledge, he mounted the steps,
and the hall porter, adorned with a crossway scarf, noiselessly opened
the door to him with a bow; as soon as he saw in the porter’s room the
cloaks and galoshes of members who thought it less trouble to take them
off downstairs; as soon as he heard the mysterious ringing bell that
preceded him as he ascended the easy, carpeted staircase, and saw the
statue on the landing, and the third porter at the top doors, a familiar
figure grown older, in the club livery, opening the door without haste
or delay, and scanning the visitors as they passed in—Levin felt the old
impression of the club come back in a rush, an impression of repose,
comfort, and propriety.

"Your hat, please," the porter said to Levin, who forgot the club rule
to leave his hat in the porter’s room. "Long time since you’ve been. The
prince put your name down yesterday. Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch is not
here yet."

The porter did not only know Levin, but also all his ties and
relationships, and so immediately mentioned his intimate friends.

Passing through the outer hall, divided up by screens, and the room
partitioned on the right, where a man sits at the fruit buffet, Levin
overtook an old man walking slowly in, and entered the dining room full
of noise and people.

"Levin, this way!" a good-natured voice shouted a little farther on. It
was Turovtsin. He was sitting with a young officer, and beside them were
two chairs turned upside down. Levin gladly went up to them. He had
always liked the good-hearted rake, Turovtsin—he was associated in his
mind with memories of his courtship—and at that moment, after the strain
of intellectual conversation, the sight of Turovtsin’s good-natured face
was particularly welcome.

Levin got up and went with him to the big table spread with spirits and
appetizers of the most various kinds. One would have thought that out of
two dozen delicacies one might find something to one’s taste, but Stepan
Arkadyevitch asked for something special, and one of the liveried
waiters standing by immediately brought what was required. They drank a
wine glassful and returned to their table.

At once, while they were still at the soup, Gagin was served with
champagne, and told the waiter to fill four glasses. Levin did not
refuse the wine, and asked for a second bottle. He was very hungry, and
ate and drank with great enjoyment, and with still greater enjoyment
took part in the lively and simple conversation of his companions.
Gagin, dropping his voice, told the last good story from Petersburg, and
the story, though improper and stupid, was so ludicrous that Levin broke
into roars of laughter so loud that those near looked round.

"Pyotr Illyitch Vinovsky invites you to drink with him," a little old
waiter interrupted Stepan Arkadyevitch, bringing two delicate glasses of
sparkling champagne, and addressing Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took the glass, and looking towards a bald man with
red mustaches at the other end of the table, he nodded to him, smiling.

"Who’s that?" asked Levin.

Levin did the same as Stepan Arkadyevitch and took the glass.

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s anecdote too was very amusing. Levin told his
story, and that too was successful. Then they talked of horses, of the
races, of what they had been doing that day, and of how smartly
Vronsky’s Atlas had won the first prize. Levin did not notice how the
time passed at dinner.

"Ah! and here they are!" Stepan Arkadyevitch said towards the end of
dinner, leaning over the back of his chair and holding out his hand to
Vronsky, who came up with a tall officer of the Guards. Vronsky’s face
too beamed with the look of good-humored enjoyment that was general in
the club. He propped his elbow playfully on Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
shoulder, whispering something to him, and he held out his hand to Levin
with the same good-humored smile.

"Yes, I left the same day. We’ve just been talking of your horse. I
congratulate you," said Levin. "It was very rapidly run."

"That’s Yashvin," Vronsky said in answer to Turovtsin, and he sat down
in the vacated seat beside them. He drank the glass offered him, and
ordered a bottle of wine. Under the influence of the club atmosphere or
the wine he had drunk, Levin chatted away to Vronsky of the best breeds
of cattle, and was very glad not to feel the slightest hostility to this
man. He even told him, among other things, that he had heard from his
wife that she had met him at Princess Marya Borissovna’s.

"Ah, Princess Marya Borissovna, she’s exquisite!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, and he told an anecdote about her which set them all
laughing. Vronsky particularly laughed with such simplehearted amusement
that Levin felt quite reconciled to him.

Getting up from the table, Levin walked with Gagin through the lofty
room to the billiard room, feeling his arms swing as he walked with a
peculiar lightness and ease. As he crossed the big room, he came upon
his father-in-law.

"I see you don’t know that name. That’s our club designation. You know
the game of rolling eggs: when one’s rolled a long while it becomes a
_shlupik_. So it is with us; one goes on coming and coming to the club,
and ends by becoming a _shlupik_. Ah, you laugh! but we look out, for
fear of dropping into it ourselves. You know Prince Tchetchensky?"
inquired the prince; and Levin saw by his face that he was just going to
relate something funny.

Talking and greeting the friends they met, Levin and the prince walked
through all the rooms: the great room where tables had already been set,
and the usual partners were playing for small stakes; the divan room,
where they were playing chess, and Sergey Ivanovitch was sitting talking
to somebody; the billiard room, where, about a sofa in a recess, there
was a lively party drinking champagne—Gagin was one of them. They peeped
into the "infernal regions," where a good many men were crowding round
one table, at which Yashvin was sitting. Trying not to make a noise,
they walked into the dark reading room, where under the shaded lamps
there sat a young man with a wrathful countenance, turning over one
journal after another, and a bald general buried in a book. They went,
too, into what the prince called the intellectual room, where three
gentlemen were engaged in a heated discussion of the latest political
news.

"Prince, please come, we’re ready," said one of his card party, who had
come to look for him, and the prince went off. Levin sat down and
listened, but recalling all the conversation of the morning he felt all
of a sudden fearfully bored. He got up hurriedly, and went to look for
Oblonsky and Turovtsin, with whom it had been so pleasant.

"It’s not that she’s dull; but this undefined, this unsettled position,"
Levin caught, and he was hurrying away, but Stepan Arkadyevitch called
to him.

"Levin," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and Levin noticed that his eyes were
not full of tears exactly, but moist, which always happened when he had
been drinking, or when he was touched. Just now it was due to both
causes. "Levin, don’t go," he said, and he warmly squeezed his arm above
the elbow, obviously not at all wishing to let him go.

Levin quickly took the offered hand, and pressed it warmly.

"I’m very, very glad," said Levin.

"Do you know, he has never met Anna?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Vronsky. "And I want above everything to take him to see her. Let us go,
Levin!"

"Well, what do you say to pyramids? Levin, will you play? Capital!" said
Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Get the table ready," he said to the marker.

After the game Vronsky and Levin sat down at Gagin’s table, and at
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s suggestion Levin took a hand in the game.

Vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends, who were
incessantly coming up to him. Every now and then he went to the
"infernal" to keep an eye on Yashvin. Levin was enjoying a delightful
sense of repose after the mental fatigue of the morning. He was glad
that all hostility was at an end with Vronsky, and the sense of peace,
decorum, and comfort never left him.

When the game was over, Stepan Arkadyevitch took Levin’s arm.

"Oh, nowhere specially. I promised Sviazhsky to go to the Society of
Agriculture. By all means, let us go," said Levin.

Levin went up to the table, paid the forty roubles he had lost; paid his
bill, the amount of which was in some mysterious way ascertained by the
little old waiter who stood at the counter, and swinging his arms he
walked through all the rooms to the way out.

"Oblonsky’s carriage!" the porter shouted in an angry bass. The carriage
drove up and both got in. It was only for the first few moments, while
the carriage was driving out of the clubhouse gates, that Levin was
still under the influence of the club atmosphere of repose, comfort, and
unimpeachable good form. But as soon as the carriage drove out into the
street, and he felt it jolting over the uneven road, heard the angry
shout of a sledge driver coming towards them, saw in the uncertain light
the red blind of a tavern and the shops, this impression was dissipated,
and he began to think over his actions, and to wonder whether he was
doing right in going to see Anna. What would Kitty say? But Stepan
Arkadyevitch gave him no time for reflection, and, as though divining
his doubts, he scattered them.

"What is the difficulty?" said Levin.

"But she has a daughter: no doubt she’s busy looking after her?" said
Levin.

And without asking the servant who opened the door whether the lady were
at home, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked into the hall. Levin followed him,
more and more doubtful whether he was doing right or wrong.

Looking at himself in the glass, Levin noticed that he was red in the
face, but he felt certain he was not drunk, and he followed Stepan
Arkadyevitch up the carpeted stairs. At the top Stepan Arkadyevitch
inquired of the footman, who bowed to him as to an intimate friend, who
was with Anna Arkadyevna, and received the answer that it was M.
Vorkuev.

Passing through the dining room, a room not very large, with dark,
paneled walls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin walked over the soft carpet
to the half-dark study, lighted up by a single lamp with a big dark
shade. Another lamp with a reflector was hanging on the wall, lighting
up a big full-length portrait of a woman, which Levin could not help
looking at. It was the portrait of Anna, painted in Italy by Mihailov.
While Stepan Arkadyevitch went behind the _treillage_, and the man’s
voice which had been speaking paused, Levin gazed at the portrait, which
stood out from the frame in the brilliant light thrown on it, and he
could not tear himself away from it. He positively forgot where he was,
and not even hearing what was said, he could not take his eyes off the
marvelous portrait. It was not a picture, but a living, charming woman,
with black curling hair, with bare arms and shoulders, with a pensive
smile on the lips, covered with soft down; triumphantly and softly she
looked at him with eyes that baffled him. She was not living only
because she was more beautiful than a living woman can be.

"I am delighted!" He heard suddenly near him a voice, unmistakably
addressing him, the voice of the very woman he had been admiring in the
portrait. Anna had come from behind the treillage to meet him, and Levin
saw in the dim light of the study the very woman of the portrait, in a
dark blue shot gown, not in the same position nor with the same
expression, but with the same perfection of beauty which the artist had
caught in the portrait. She was less dazzling in reality, but, on the
other hand, there was something fresh and seductive in the living woman
which was not in the portrait.

She had risen to meet him, not concealing her pleasure at seeing him;
and in the quiet ease with which she held out her little vigorous hand,
introduced him to Vorkuev and indicated a red-haired, pretty little girl
who was sitting at work, calling her her pupil, Levin recognized and
liked the manners of a woman of the great world, always self-possessed
and natural.

"I am delighted, delighted," she repeated, and on her lips these simple
words took for Levin’s ears a special significance. "I have known you
and liked you for a long while, both from your friendship with Stiva and
for your wife’s sake.... I knew her for a very short time, but she left
on me the impression of an exquisite flower, simply a flower. And to
think she will soon be a mother!"

She spoke easily and without haste, looking now and then from Levin to
her brother, and Levin felt that the impression he was making was good,
and he felt immediately at home, simple and happy with her, as though he
had known her from childhood.

"Ivan Petrovitch and I settled in Alexey’s study," she said in answer to
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s question whether he might smoke, "just so as to be
able to smoke"—and glancing at Levin, instead of asking whether he would
smoke, she pulled closer a tortoise-shell cigar-case and took a
cigarette.

"Yes, isn’t it extraordinarily fine?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, noticing
that Levin was scrutinizing the picture.

Levin looked from the portrait to the original. A peculiar brilliance
lighted up Anna’s face when she felt his eyes on her. Levin flushed, and
to cover his confusion would have asked whether she had seen Darya
Alexandrovna lately; but at that moment Anna spoke. "We were just
talking, Ivan Petrovitch and I, of Vashtchenkov’s last pictures. Have
you seen them?"

"Yes, I have seen them," answered Levin.

Levin asked if she had seen Dolly lately.

"Yes, I have seen his pictures. I didn’t care for them very much," Levin
went back to the subject she had started.

Levin talked now not at all with that purely businesslike attitude to
the subject with which he had been talking all the morning. Every word
in his conversation with her had a special significance. And talking to
her was pleasant; still pleasanter it was to listen to her.

Levin said that the French had carried conventionality further than
anyone, and that consequently they see a great merit in the return to
realism. In the fact of not lying they see poetry.

Never had anything clever said by Levin given him so much pleasure as
this remark. Anna’s face lighted up at once, as at once she appreciated
the thought. She laughed.

"Yes, yes, this is a woman!" Levin thought, forgetting himself and
staring persistently at her lovely, mobile face, which at that moment
was all at once completely transformed. Levin did not hear what she was
talking of as she leaned over to her brother, but he was struck by the
change of her expression. Her face—so handsome a moment before in its
repose—suddenly wore a look of strange curiosity, anger, and pride. But
this lasted only an instant. She dropped her eyelids, as though
recollecting something.

"Yes, but I can’t help it; I couldn’t do it. Count Alexey Kirillovitch
urged me very much" (as she uttered the words _Count Alexey
Kirillovitch_ she glanced with appealing timidity at Levin, and he
unconsciously responded with a respectful and reassuring look); "he
urged me to take up the school in the village. I visited it several
times. The children were very nice, but I could not feel drawn to the
work. You speak of energy. Energy rests upon love; and come as it will,
there’s no forcing it. I took to this child—I could not myself say why."

And she glanced again at Levin. And her smile and her glance—all told
him that it was to him only she was addressing her words, valuing his
good opinion, and at the same time sure beforehand that they understood
each other.

"I quite understand that," Levin answered. "It’s impossible to give
one’s heart to a school or such institutions in general, and I believe
that’s just why philanthropic institutions always give such poor
results."

"Yes, yes," she agreed; "I never could. _Je n’ai pas le coeur assez_
large to love a whole asylum of horrid little girls. _Cela ne m’a jamais
réussi._ There are so many women who have made themselves _une position
sociale_ in that way. And now more than ever," she said with a mournful,
confiding expression, ostensibly addressing her brother, but
unmistakably intending her words only for Levin, "now when I have such
need of some occupation, I cannot." And suddenly frowning (Levin saw
that she was frowning at herself for talking about herself) she changed
the subject. "I know about you," she said to Levin; "that you’re not a
public-spirited citizen, and I have defended you to the best of my
ability."

"I told him about it," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his sister, nodding
at Levin.

"You shouldn’t have. My writing is something after the fashion of those
little baskets and carving which Liza Mertsalova used to sell me from
the prisons. She had the direction of the prison department in that
society," she turned to Levin; "and they were miracles of patience, the
work of those poor wretches."

And Levin saw a new trait in this woman, who attracted him so
extraordinarily. Besides wit, grace, and beauty, she had truth. She had
no wish to hide from him all the bitterness of her position. As she said
that she sighed, and her face suddenly taking a hard expression, looked
as it were turned to stone. With that expression on her face she was
more beautiful than ever; but the expression was new; it was utterly
unlike that expression, radiant with happiness and creating happiness,
which had been caught by the painter in her portrait. Levin looked more
than once at the portrait and at her figure, as taking her brother’s arm
she walked with him to the high doors and he felt for her a tenderness
and pity at which he wondered himself.

She asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing room, while she
stayed behind to say a few words to her brother. "About her divorce,
about Vronsky, and what he’s doing at the club, about me?" wondered
Levin. And he was so keenly interested by the question of what she was
saying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that he scarcely heard what Vorkuev was
telling him of the qualities of the story for children Anna Arkadyevna
had written.

At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting matter,
continued. There was not a single instant when a subject for
conversation was to seek; on the contrary, it was felt that one had
hardly time to say what one had to say, and eagerly held back to hear
what the others were saying. And all that was said, not only by her, but
by Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch—all, so it seemed to Levin, gained
peculiar significance from her appreciation and her criticism. While he
followed this interesting conversation, Levin was all the time admiring
her—her beauty, her intelligence, her culture, and at the same time her
directness and genuine depth of feeling. He listened and talked, and all
the while he was thinking of her inner life, trying to divine her
feelings. And though he had judged her so severely hitherto, now by some
strange chain of reasoning he was justifying her and was also sorry for
her, and afraid that Vronsky did not fully understand her. At eleven
o’clock, when Stepan Arkadyevitch got up to go (Vorkuev had left
earlier), it seemed to Levin that he had only just come. Regretfully
Levin too rose.

"Certainly, yes, I will tell her..." Levin said, blushing.

"Well, didn’t I tell you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, seeing that Levin
had been completely won over.

"Yes," said Levin dreamily, "an extraordinary woman! It’s not her
cleverness, but she has such wonderful depth of feeling. I’m awfully
sorry for her!"

Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase in their
conversation with her, and recalling the minutest changes in her
expression, entering more and more into her position, and feeling
sympathy for her, Levin reached home.

At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina Alexandrovna was quite well, and
that her sisters had not long been gone, and he handed him two letters.
Levin read them at once in the hall, that he might not over look them
later. One was from Sokolov, his bailiff. Sokolov wrote that the corn
could not be sold, that it was fetching only five and a half roubles,
and that more than that could not be got for it. The other letter was
from his sister. She scolded him for her business being still unsettled.

"Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can’t get more," Levin
decided the first question, which had always before seemed such a
weighty one, with extraordinary facility on the spot. "It’s
extraordinary how all one’s time is taken up here," he thought,
considering the second letter. He felt himself to blame for not having
got done what his sister had asked him to do for her. "Today, again,
I’ve not been to the court, but today I’ve certainly not had time." And
resolving that he would not fail to do it next day, he went up to his
wife. As he went in, Levin rapidly ran through mentally the day he had
spent. All the events of the day were conversations, conversations he
had heard and taken part in. All the conversations were upon subjects
which, if he had been alone at home, he would never have taken up, but
here they were very interesting. And all these conversations were right
enough, only in two places there was something not quite right. One was
what he had said about the carp, the other was something not "quite the
thing" in the tender sympathy he was feeling for Anna.

Levin found his wife low-spirited and dull. The dinner of the three
sisters had gone off very well, but then they had waited and waited for
him, all of them had felt dull, the sisters had departed, and she had
been left alone.

And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his doubts as to
whether he had done right in going to see Anna were settled once for
all. He knew now that he ought not to have done so.

"I’m sure you won’t be angry at my going. Stiva begged me to, and Dolly
wished it," Levin went on.

It was a long while before Levin could soothe his wife. At last he
succeeded in calming her, only by confessing that a feeling of pity, in
conjunction with the wine he had drunk, had been too much for him, that
he had succumbed to Anna’s artful influence, and that he would avoid
her. One thing he did with more sincerity confess to was that living so
long in Moscow, a life of nothing but conversation, eating and drinking,
he was degenerating. They talked till three o’clock in the morning. Only
at three o’clock were they sufficiently reconciled to be able to go to
sleep.

After taking leave of her guests, Anna did not sit down, but began
walking up and down the room. She had unconsciously the whole evening
done her utmost to arouse in Levin a feeling of love—as of late she had
fallen into doing with all young men—and she knew she had attained her
aim, as far as was possible in one evening, with a married and
conscientious man. She liked him indeed extremely, and, in spite of the
striking difference, from the masculine point of view, between Vronsky
and Levin, as a woman she saw something they had in common, which had
made Kitty able to love both. Yet as soon as he was out of the room, she
ceased to think of him.

"No, I’ve not been dull; I’ve learned long ago not to be dull. Stiva has
been here and Levin."

"Yes, they meant to come and see you. Well, how did you like Levin?" he
said, sitting down beside her.

There are no conditions to which a man cannot become used, especially if
he sees that all around him are living in the same way. Levin could not
have believed three months before that he could have gone quietly to
sleep in the condition in which he was that day, that leading an
aimless, irrational life, living too beyond his means, after drinking to
excess (he could not call what happened at the club anything else),
forming inappropriately friendly relations with a man with whom his wife
had once been in love, and a still more inappropriate call upon a woman
who could only be called a lost woman, after being fascinated by that
woman and causing his wife distress—he could still go quietly to sleep.
But under the influence of fatigue, a sleepless night, and the wine he
had drunk, his sleep was sound and untroubled.

Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in Kitty’s
character in general, Levin was struck by what was revealed now, when
suddenly all disguises were thrown off and the very kernel of her soul
shone in her eyes. And in this simplicity and nakedness of her soul,
she, the very woman he loved in her, was more manifest than ever. She
looked at him, smiling; but all at once her brows twitched, she threw up
her head, and going quickly up to him, clutched his hand and pressed
close up to him, breathing her hot breath upon him. She was in pain and
was, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering. And for the first
minute, from habit, it seemed to him that he was to blame. But in her
eyes there was a tenderness that told him that she was far from
reproaching him, that she loved him for her sufferings. "If not I, who
is to blame for it?" he thought unconsciously, seeking someone
responsible for this suffering for him to punish; but there was no one
responsible. She was suffering, complaining, and triumphing in her
sufferings, and rejoicing in them, and loving them. He saw that
something sublime was being accomplished in her soul, but what? He could
not make it out. It was beyond his understanding.

And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken up the knitting she
had brought in in the night and begun working at it again.

As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the maid-servant come in at
the other. He stood at the door and heard Kitty giving exact directions
to the maid, and beginning to help her move the bedstead.

"So you think that it may go on well? Lord have mercy on us and help
us!" Levin said, seeing his own horse driving out of the gate. Jumping
into the sledge beside Kouzma, he told him to drive to the doctor’s.

The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that "he had been up
late, and had given orders not to be waked, but would get up soon." The
footman was cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed very busy about them.
This concentration of the footman upon his lamps, and his indifference
to what was passing in Levin, at first astounded him, but immediately on
considering the question he realized that no one knew or was bound to
know his feelings, and that it was all the more necessary to act calmly,
sensibly, and resolutely to get through this wall of indifference and
attain his aim.

"Don’t be in a hurry or let anything slip," Levin said to himself,
feeling a greater and greater flow of physical energy and attention to
all that lay before him to do.

Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up, Levin considered
various plans, and decided on the following one: that Kouzma should go
for another doctor, while he himself should go to the chemist’s for
opium, and if when he came back the doctor had not yet begun to get up,
he would either by tipping the footman, or by force, wake the doctor at
all hazards.

At the chemist’s the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders for a
coachman who stood waiting, and refused him opium with the same
callousness with which the doctor’s footman had cleaned his lamp
chimneys. Trying not to get flurried or out of temper, Levin mentioned
the names of the doctor and midwife, and explaining what the opium was
needed for, tried to persuade him. The assistant inquired in German
whether he should give it, and receiving an affirmative reply from
behind the partition, he took out a bottle and a funnel, deliberately
poured the opium from a bigger bottle into a little one, stuck on a
label, sealed it up, in spite of Levin’s request that he would not do
so, and was about to wrap it up too. This was more than Levin could
stand; he took the bottle firmly out of his hands, and ran to the big
glass doors. The doctor was not even now getting up, and the footman,
busy now in putting down the rugs, refused to wake him. Levin
deliberately took out a ten rouble note, and, careful to speak slowly,
though losing no time over the business, he handed him the note, and
explained that Pyotr Dmitrievitch (what a great and important personage
he seemed to Levin now, this Pyotr Dmitrievitch, who had been of so
little consequence in his eyes before!) had promised to come at any
time; that he would certainly not be angry! and that he must therefore
wake him at once.

The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the waiting
room.

Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving about,
washing, and saying something. Three minutes passed; it seemed to Levin
that more than an hour had gone by. He could not wait any longer.

"In a minute; in a minute!" answered a voice, and to his amazement Levin
heard that the doctor was smiling as he spoke.

"Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" Levin was beginning again in a plaintive voice,
just as the doctor came in dressed and ready. "These people have no
conscience," thought Levin. "Combing his hair, while we’re dying!"

Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell him every
unnecessary detail of his wife’s condition, interrupting his account
repeatedly with entreaties that the doctor would come with him at once.

Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he was laughing at him;
but the doctor had no notion of making fun of him.

"So you’ll come immediately?" said Levin, looking wrathfully at the
servant who was bringing in the coffee.

"No, I can’t stand it!" said Levin, jumping up. "So you’ll be with us in
a quarter of an hour."

When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as the princess, and
they went up to the bedroom door together. The princess had tears in her
eyes, and her hands were shaking. Seeing Levin, she embraced him, and
burst into tears.

From the moment when he had waked up and understood what was going on,
Levin had prepared his mind to bear resolutely what was before him, and
without considering or anticipating anything, to avoid upsetting his
wife, and on the contrary to soothe her and keep up her courage. Without
allowing himself even to think of what was to come, of how it would end,
judging from his inquiries as to the usual duration of these ordeals,
Levin had in his imagination braced himself to bear up and to keep a
tight rein on his feelings for five hours, and it had seemed to him he
could do this. But when he came back from the doctor’s and saw her
sufferings again, he fell to repeating more and more frequently: "Lord,
have mercy on us, and succor us!" He sighed, and flung his head up, and
began to feel afraid he could not bear it, that he would burst into
tears or run away. Such agony it was to him. And only one hour had
passed.

All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form no
conception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin. He lost all sense
of time. Minutes—those minutes when she sent for him and he held her
moist hand, that would squeeze his hand with extraordinary violence and
then push it away—seemed to him hours, and hours seemed to him minutes.
He was surprised when Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a candle
behind a screen, and he found that it was five o’clock in the afternoon.
If he had been told it was only ten o’clock in the morning, he would not
have been more surprised. Where he was all this time, he knew as little
as the time of anything. He saw her swollen face, sometimes bewildered
and in agony, sometimes smiling and trying to reassure him. He saw the
old princess too, flushed and overwrought, with her gray curls in
disorder, forcing herself to gulp down her tears, biting her lips; he
saw Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fat cigarettes, and Lizaveta
Petrovna with a firm, resolute, reassuring face, and the old prince
walking up and down the hall with a frowning face. But why they came in
and went out, where they were, he did not know. The princess was with
the doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a table set for
dinner suddenly appeared; then she was not there, but Dolly was. Then
Levin remembered he had been sent somewhere. Once he had been sent to
move a table and sofa. He had done this eagerly, thinking it had to be
done for her sake, and only later on he found it was his own bed he had
been getting ready. Then he had been sent to the study to ask the doctor
something. The doctor had answered and then had said something about the
irregularities in the municipal council. Then he had been sent to the
bedroom to help the old princess to move the holy picture in its silver
and gold setting, and with the princess’s old waiting maid he had
clambered on a shelf to reach it and had broken the little lamp, and the
old servant had tried to reassure him about the lamp and about his wife,
and he carried the holy picture and set it at Kitty’s head, carefully
tucking it in behind the pillow. But where, when, and why all this had
happened, he could not tell. He did not understand why the old princess
took his hand, and looking compassionately at him, begged him not to
worry himself, and Dolly persuaded him to eat something and led him out
of the room, and even the doctor looked seriously and with commiseration
at him and offered him a drop of something.

All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions. One was away
from her, with the doctor, who kept smoking one fat cigarette after
another and extinguishing them on the edge of a full ash tray, with
Dolly, and with the old prince, where there was talk about dinner, about
politics, about Marya Petrovna’s illness, and where Levin suddenly
forgot for a minute what was happening, and felt as though he had waked
up from sleep; the other was in her presence, at her pillow, where his
heart seemed breaking and still did not break from sympathetic
suffering, and he prayed to God without ceasing. And every time he was
brought back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reaching him from the
bedroom, he fell into the same strange terror that had come upon him the
first minute. Every time he heard a shriek, he jumped up, ran to justify
himself, remembered on the way that he was not to blame, and he longed
to defend her, to help her. But as he looked at her, he saw again that
help was impossible, and he was filled with terror and prayed: "Lord,
have mercy on us, and help us!" And as time went on, both these
conditions became more intense; the calmer he became away from her,
completely forgetting her, the more agonizing became both her sufferings
and his feeling of helplessness before them. He jumped up, would have
liked to run away, but ran to her.

He did not know whether it was late or early. The candles had all burned
out. Dolly had just been in the study and had suggested to the doctor
that he should lie down. Levin sat listening to the doctor’s stories of
a quack mesmerizer and looking at the ashes of his cigarette. There had
been a period of repose, and he had sunk into oblivion. He had
completely forgotten what was going on now. He heard the doctor’s chat
and understood it. Suddenly there came an unearthly shriek. The shriek
was so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but holding his breath,
gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor. The doctor put his head on one
side, listened, and smiled approvingly. Everything was so extraordinary
that nothing could strike Levin as strange. "I suppose it must be so,"
he thought, and still sat where he was. Whose scream was this? He jumped
up, ran on tiptoe to the bedroom, edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and the
princess, and took up his position at Kitty’s pillow. The scream had
subsided, but there was some change now. What it was he did not see and
did not comprehend, and he had no wish to see or comprehend. But he saw
it by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna. Lizaveta Petrovna’s face was stern
and pale, and still as resolute, though her jaws were twitching, and her
eyes were fixed intently on Kitty. Kitty’s swollen and agonized face, a
tress of hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and sought
his eyes. Her lifted hands asked for his hands. Clutching his chill
hands in her moist ones, she began squeezing them to her face.

Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.

"It’s the end," said the doctor. And the doctor’s face was so grave as
he said it that Levin took _the end_ as meaning her death.

Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom. The first thing he saw was the
face of Lizaveta Petrovna. It was even more frowning and stern. Kitty’s
face he did not know. In the place where it had been was something that
was fearful in its strained distortion and in the sounds that came from
it. He fell down with his head on the wooden framework of the bed,
feeling that his heart was bursting. The awful scream never paused, it
became still more awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limit
of terror, suddenly it ceased. Levin could not believe his ears, but
there could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and he heard a subdued
stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice, gasping, alive,
tender, and blissful, uttered softly, "It’s over!"

And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in which he
had been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin felt himself all in
an instant borne back to the old every-day world, glorified though now,
by such a radiance of happiness that he could not bear it. The strained
chords snapped, sobs and tears of joy which he had never foreseen rose
up with such violence that his whole body shook, that for long they
prevented him from speaking.

"Alive! alive! And a boy too! Set your mind at rest!" Levin heard
Lizaveta Petrovna saying, as she slapped the baby’s back with a shaking
hand.

If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that he had died
with her, and that their children were angels, and that God was standing
before him, he would have been surprised at nothing. But now, coming
back to the world of reality, he had to make great mental efforts to
take in that she was alive and well, and that the creature squalling so
desperately was his son. Kitty was alive, her agony was over. And he was
unutterably happy. That he understood; he was completely happy in it.
But the baby? Whence, why, who was he?... He could not get used to the
idea. It seemed to him something extraneous, superfluous, to which he
could not accustom himself.

At ten o’clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch were sitting at Levin’s. Having inquired after Kitty, they
had dropped into conversation upon other subjects. Levin heard them, and
unconsciously, as they talked, going over the past, over what had been
up to that morning, he thought of himself as he had been yesterday till
that point. It was as though a hundred years had passed since then. He
felt himself exalted to unattainable heights, from which he studiously
lowered himself so as not to wound the people he was talking to. He
talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her condition now,
of his son, in whose existence he tried to school himself into
believing. The whole world of woman, which had taken for him since his
marriage a new value he had never suspected before, was now so exalted
that he could not take it in in his imagination. He heard them talk of
yesterday’s dinner at the club, and thought: "What is happening with her
now? Is she asleep? How is she? What is she thinking of? Is he crying,
my son Dmitri?" And in the middle of the conversation, in the middle of
a sentence, he jumped up and went out of the room.

"Very well, in a minute," answered Levin, and without stopping, he went
to her room.

Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous efforts to
discover in his heart some traces of fatherly feeling for it. He felt
nothing towards it but disgust. But when it was undressed and he caught
a glimpse of wee, wee, little hands, little feet, saffron-colored, with
little toes, too, and positively with a little big toe different from
the rest, and when he saw Lizaveta Petrovna closing the wide-open little
hands, as though they were soft springs, and putting them into linen
garments, such pity for the little creature came upon him, and such
terror that she would hurt it, that he held her hand back.

When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a firm doll,
Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though proud of her handiwork, and stood
a little away so that Levin might see his son in all his glory.

Levin sighed with mortification. This splendid baby excited in him no
feeling but disgust and compassion. It was not at all the feeling he had
looked forward to.

Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed his wife and
went out of the dark room. What he felt towards this little creature was
utterly unlike what he had expected. There was nothing cheerful and
joyous in the feeling; on the contrary, it was a new torture of
apprehension. It was the consciousness of a new sphere of liability to
pain. And this sense was so painful at first, the apprehension lest this
helpless creature should suffer was so intense, that it prevented him
from noticing the strange thrill of senseless joy and even pride that he
had felt when the baby sneezed.

"Katerina Alexandrovna Levin," answered the footman.

"How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible, and
curious! What can he be telling the other with such warmth?" she
thought, staring at two men who walked by. "Can one ever tell anyone
what one is feeling? I meant to tell Dolly, and it’s a good thing I
didn’t tell her. How pleased she would have been at my misery! She would
have concealed it, but her chief feeling would have been delight at my
being punished for the happiness she envied me for. Kitty, she would
have been even more pleased. How I can see through her! She knows I was
more than usually sweet to her husband. And she’s jealous and hates me.
And she despises me. In her eyes I’m an immoral woman. If I were an
immoral woman I could have made her husband fall in love with me ... if
I’d cared to. And, indeed, I did care to. There’s someone who’s pleased
with himself," she thought, as she saw a fat, rubicund gentleman coming
towards her. He took her for an acquaintance, and lifted his glossy hat
above his bald, glossy head, and then perceived his mistake. "He thought
he knew me. Well, he knows me as well as anyone in the world knows me. I
don’t know myself. I know my appetites, as the French say. They want
that dirty ice cream, that they do know for certain," she thought,
looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who took a barrel off
his head and began wiping his perspiring face with a towel. "We all want
what is sweet and nice. If not sweetmeats, then a dirty ice. And Kitty’s
the same—if not Vronsky, then Levin. And she envies me, and hates me.
And we all hate each other. I Kitty, Kitty me. Yes, that’s the truth.
‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur._’ _Je me fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._ I’ll tell
him that when he comes," she thought and smiled. But the same instant
she remembered that she had no one now to tell anything amusing to. "And
there’s nothing amusing, nothing mirthful, really. It’s all hateful.
They’re singing for vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses
himself! as if he were afraid of missing something. Why these churches
and this singing and this humbug? Simply to conceal that we all hate
each other like these cab drivers who are abusing each other so angrily.
Yashvin says, ‘He wants to strip me of my shirt, and I him of his.’ Yes,
that’s the truth!"

He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart of the
people, in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the sight of that
uplifting of the spirit of the people, of which, like all residents in
the capital and big towns, he was fully persuaded. Katavasov had long
been meaning to carry out his promise to stay with Levin, and so he was
going with him.

Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to send to meet
him, as he did not know when he should be able to leave Moscow. Levin
was not at home when Katavasov and Sergey Ivanovitch in a fly hired at
the station drove up to the steps of the Pokrovskoe house, as black as
Moors from the dust of the road. Kitty, sitting on the balcony with her
father and sister, recognized her brother-in-law, and ran down to meet
him.

And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to wash,
one in his room and the other in what had been Dolly’s, and giving
orders for their luncheon, Kitty ran out onto the balcony, enjoying the
freedom, and rapidity of movement, of which she had been deprived during
the months of her pregnancy.

Ever since, by his beloved brother’s deathbed, Levin had first glanced
into the questions of life and death in the light of these new
convictions, as he called them, which had during the period from his
twentieth to his thirty-fourth year imperceptibly replaced his childish
and youthful beliefs—he had been stricken with horror, not so much of
death, as of life, without any knowledge of whence, and why, and how,
and what it was. The physical organization, its decay, the
indestructibility of matter, the law of the conservation of energy,
evolution, were the words which usurped the place of his old belief.
These words and the ideas associated with them were very well for
intellectual purposes. But for life they yielded nothing, and Levin felt
suddenly like a man who has changed his warm fur cloak for a muslin
garment, and going for the first time into the frost is immediately
convinced, not by reason, but by his whole nature that he is as good as
naked, and that he must infallibly perish miserably.

From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it, and still went
on living as before, Levin had never lost this sense of terror at his
lack of knowledge.

At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with it, had
completely crowded out these thoughts. But of late, while he was staying
in Moscow after his wife’s confinement, with nothing to do, the question
that clamored for solution had more and more often, more and more
insistently, haunted Levin’s mind.

What puzzled and distracted him above everything was that the majority
of men of his age and circle had, like him, exchanged their old beliefs
for the same new convictions, and yet saw nothing to lament in this, and
were perfectly satisfied and serene. So that, apart from the principal
question, Levin was tortured by other questions too. Were these people
sincere? he asked himself, or were they playing a part? or was it that
they understood the answers science gave to these problems in some
different, clearer sense than he did? And he assiduously studied both
these men’s opinions and the books which treated of these scientific
explanations.

His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological works
of Homiakov. Levin read the second volume of Homiakov’s works, and in
spite of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative style which at first
repelled him, he was impressed by the doctrine of the church he found in
them. He was struck at first by the idea that the apprehension of divine
truths had not been vouchsafed to man, but to a corporation of men bound
together by love—to the church. What delighted him was the thought how
much easier it was to believe in a still existing living church,
embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God at its head, and
therefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in God,
in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than to begin with God, a
mysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc. But afterwards, on reading
a Catholic writer’s history of the church, and then a Greek orthodox
writer’s history of the church, and seeing that the two churches, in
their very conception infallible, each deny the authority of the other,
Homiakov’s doctrine of the church lost all its charm for him, and this
edifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers’ edifices.

"Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life’s impossible; and
that I can’t know, and so I can’t live," Levin said to himself.

This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated by
human thought in almost all their ramifications rested. It was the
prevalent conviction, and of all other explanations Levin had
unconsciously, not knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway the
clearest, and made it his own.

And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was several
times so near suicide that he hid the cord that he might not be tempted
to hang himself, and was afraid to go out with his gun for fear of
shooting himself.

But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang himself; he went on
living.

When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he could find
no answer to the questions and was reduced to despair, but he left off
questioning himself about it. It seemed as though he knew both what he
was and for what he was living, for he acted and lived resolutely and
without hesitation. Indeed, in these latter days he was far more decided
and unhesitating in life than he had ever been.

To live the same family life as his father and forefathers—that is, in
the same condition of culture—and to bring up his children in the same,
was incontestably necessary. It was as necessary as dining when one was
hungry. And to do this, just as it was necessary to cook dinner, it was
necessary to keep the mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so as
to yield an income. Just as incontestably as it was necessary to repay a
debt was it necessary to keep the property in such a condition that his
son, when he received it as a heritage, would say "thank you" to his
father as Levin had said "thank you" to his grandfather for all he built
and planted. And to do this it was necessary to look after the land
himself, not to let it, and to breed cattle, manure the fields, and
plant timber.

And all this, together with shooting and his new bee-keeping, filled up
the whole of Levin’s life, which had no meaning at all for him, when he
began to think.

But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do, Levin knew in just the
same way _how_ he had to do it all, and what was more important than the
rest.

Levin knew that when he got home he must first of all go to his wife,
who was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting for three
hours to see him could wait a little longer. He knew too that,
regardless of all the pleasure he felt in taking a swarm, he must forego
that pleasure, and leave the old man to see to the bees alone, while he
talked to the peasants who had come after him to the bee-house.

The day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to Pokrovskoe was one of Levin’s
most painful days. It was the very busiest working time, when all the
peasantry show an extraordinary intensity of self-sacrifice in labor,
such as is never shown in any other conditions of life, and would be
highly esteemed if the men who showed these qualities themselves thought
highly of them, and if it were not repeated every year, and if the
results of this intense labor were not so simple.

Having lived the greater part of his life in the country and in the
closest relations with the peasants, Levin always felt in this busy time
that he was infected by this general quickening of energy in the people.

"It’ll soon be one, and they’re only beginning the third sheaf," thought
Levin. He went up to the man that was feeding the machine, and shouting
over the roar of the machine he told him to put it in more slowly. "You
put in too much at a time, Fyodor. Do you see—it gets choked, that’s why
it isn’t getting on. Do it evenly."

Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to his moist face, shouted
something in response, but still went on doing it as Levin did not want
him to.

Levin, going up to the machine, moved Fyodor aside, and began feeding
the corn in himself. Working on till the peasants’ dinner hour, which
was not long in coming, he went out of the barn with Fyodor and fell
into talk with him, stopping beside a neat yellow sheaf of rye laid on
the thrashing floor for seed.

Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the one in which Levin
had once allotted land to his cooperative association. Now it had been
let to a former house porter.

Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked whether Platon, a
well-to-do peasant of good character belonging to the same village,
would not take the land for the coming year.

"How thinks of God? How does he live for his soul?" Levin almost
shouted.

"Yes, yes, good-bye!" said Levin, breathless with excitement, and
turning round he took his stick and walked quickly away towards home. At
the peasant’s words that Fokanitch lived for his soul, in truth, in
God’s way, undefined but significant ideas seemed to burst out as though
they had been locked up, and all striving towards one goal, they
thronged whirling through his head, blinding him with their light.

Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much in his thoughts
(he could not yet disentangle them) as in his spiritual condition,
unlike anything he had experienced before.

"Can I have found the solution of it all? can my sufferings be over?"
thought Levin, striding along the dusty road, not noticing the heat nor
his weariness, and experiencing a sense of relief from prolonged
suffering. This feeling was so delicious that it seemed to him
incredible. He was breathless with emotion and incapable of going
farther; he turned off the road into the forest and lay down in the
shade of an aspen on the uncut grass. He took his hat off his hot head
and lay propped on his elbow in the lush, feathery, woodland grass.

And Levin remembered a scene he had lately witnessed between Dolly and
her children. The children, left to themselves, had begun cooking
raspberries over the candles and squirting milk into each other’s mouths
with a syringe. Their mother, catching them at these pranks, began
reminding them in Levin’s presence of the trouble their mischief gave to
the grown-up people, and that this trouble was all for their sake, and
that if they smashed the cups they would have nothing to drink their tea
out of, and that if they wasted the milk, they would have nothing to
eat, and die of hunger.

And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary incredulity with which
the children heard what their mother said to them. They were simply
annoyed that their amusing play had been interrupted, and did not
believe a word of what their mother was saying. They could not believe
it indeed, for they could not take in the immensity of all they
habitually enjoyed, and so could not conceive that what they were
destroying was the very thing they lived by.

"The church! the church!" Levin repeated to himself. He turned over on
the other side, and leaning on his elbow, fell to gazing into the
distance at a herd of cattle crossing over to the river.

Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to mysterious
voices that seemed talking joyfully and earnestly within him.

Levin looked before him and saw a herd of cattle, then he caught sight
of his trap with Raven in the shafts, and the coachman, who, driving up
to the herd, said something to the herdsman. Then he heard the rattle of
the wheels and the snort of the sleek horse close by him. But he was so
buried in his thoughts that he did not even wonder why the coachman had
come for him.

Levin got into the trap and took the reins. As though just roused out of
sleep, for a long while Levin could not collect his faculties. He stared
at the sleek horse flecked with lather between his haunches and on his
neck, where the harness rubbed, stared at Ivan the coachman sitting
beside him, and remembered that he was expecting his brother, thought
that his wife was most likely uneasy at his long absence, and tried to
guess who was the visitor who had come with his brother. And his brother
and his wife and the unknown guest seemed to him now quite different
from before. He fancied that now his relations with all men would be
different.

Pulling the stiff rein and holding in the good horse that snorted with
impatience and seemed begging to be let go, Levin looked round at Ivan
sitting beside him, not knowing what to do with his unoccupied hand,
continually pressing down his shirt as it puffed out, and he tried to
find something to start a conversation about with him. He would have
said that Ivan had pulled the saddle-girth up too high, but that was
like blame, and he longed for friendly, warm talk. Nothing else occurred
to him.

"Your honor must keep to the right and mind that stump," said the
coachman, pulling the rein Levin held.

"Please don’t touch and don’t teach me!" said Levin, angered by this
interference. Now, as always, interference made him angry, and he felt
sorrowfully at once how mistaken had been his supposition that his
spiritual condition could immediately change him in contact with
reality.

"Old or young?" asked Levin, laughing, reminded of someone, he did not
know whom, by Tanya’s performance.

"Oh, I hope it’s not a tiresome person!" thought Levin.

As soon as he turned, at a bend in the road, and saw the party coming,
Levin recognized Katavasov in a straw hat, walking along swinging his
arms just as Tanya had shown him. Katavasov was very fond of discussing
metaphysics, having derived his notions from natural science writers who
had never studied metaphysics, and in Moscow Levin had had many
arguments with him of late.

And one of these arguments, in which Katavasov had obviously considered
that he came off victorious, was the first thing Levin thought of as he
recognized him.

Getting out of the trap and greeting his brother and Katavasov, Levin
asked about his wife.

"She has taken Mitya to Kolok" (a copse near the house). "She meant to
have him out there because it’s so hot indoors," said Dolly. Levin had
always advised his wife not to take the baby to the wood, thinking it
unsafe, and he was not pleased to hear this.

"Oh, nothing special. Busy as usual with the land," answered Levin.
"Well, and what about you? Come for long? We have been expecting you for
such a long time."

At these words the brothers’ eyes met, and Levin, in spite of the desire
he always had, stronger than ever just now, to be on affectionate and
still more open terms with his brother, felt an awkwardness in looking
at him. He dropped his eyes and did not know what to say.

Casting over the subjects of conversation that would be pleasant to
Sergey Ivanovitch, and would keep him off the subject of the Servian war
and the Slavonic question, at which he had hinted by the allusion to
what he had to do in Moscow, Levin began to talk of Sergey Ivanovitch’s
book.

And these words were enough to re-establish again between the brothers
that tone—hardly hostile, but chilly—which Levin had been so longing to
avoid.

Levin went up to Katavasov.

"No, I’ve not finished reading him," said Levin. "But I don’t need him
now."

Going along the narrow path to a little uncut meadow covered on one side
with thick clumps of brilliant heart’s-ease among which stood up here
and there tall, dark green tufts of hellebore, Levin settled his guests
in the dense, cool shade of the young aspens on a bench and some stumps
purposely put there for visitors to the bee house who might be afraid of
the bees, and he went off himself to the hut to get bread, cucumbers,
and fresh honey, to regale them with.

His ears were filled with the incessant hum in various notes, now the
busy hum of the working bee flying quickly off, then the blaring of the
lazy drone, and the excited buzz of the bees on guard protecting their
property from the enemy and preparing to sting. On the farther side of
the fence the old bee-keeper was shaving a hoop for a tub, and he did
not see Levin. Levin stood still in the midst of the beehives and did
not call him.

"That’s the right thing for him," said Levin. "Are volunteers still
going out then?" he added, glancing at Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Well, what is one to make of it? For mercy’s sake, do explain to me,
Sergey Ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going, whom are they
fighting with?" asked the old prince, unmistakably taking up a
conversation that had sprung up in Levin’s absence.

"But the prince is not speaking of help," said Levin, coming to the
assistance of his father-in-law, "but of war. The prince says that
private persons cannot take part in war without the permission of the
government."

"But that’s not a bee, it’s a wasp," said Levin.

"Well now, well, what’s your own theory?" Katavasov said to Levin with a
smile, distinctly challenging him to a discussion. "Why have not private
persons the right to do so?"

"But I should not kill them," said Levin.

"Perhaps so," said Levin evasively; "but I don’t see it. I’m one of the
people myself, and I don’t feel it."

"Here, then, ask him. He knows nothing about it and thinks nothing,"
said Levin. "Have you heard about the war, Mihalitch?" he said, turning
to him. "What they read in the church? What do you think about it? Ought
we to fight for the Christians?"

"It means, to my thinking," said Levin, who was beginning to get warm,
"that among eighty millions of people there can always be found not
hundreds, as now, but tens of thousands of people who have lost caste,
ne’er-do-wells, who are always ready to go anywhere—to Pogatchev’s
bands, to Khiva, to Serbia..."

"That word ‘people’ is so vague," said Levin. "Parish clerks, teachers,
and one in a thousand of the peasants, maybe, know what it’s all about.
The rest of the eighty millions, like Mihalitch, far from expressing
their will, haven’t the faintest idea what there is for them to express
their will about. What right have we to say that this is the people’s
will?"

"Frogs or no frogs, I’m not the editor of a paper and I don’t want to
defend them; but I am speaking of the unanimity in the intellectual
world," said Sergey Ivanovitch, addressing his brother. Levin would have
answered, but the old prince interrupted him.

"I don’t see that it was a joke, that..." Levin was beginning, but
Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.

"But it’s not only making a sacrifice, but killing Turks," said Levin
timidly. "The people make sacrifices and are ready to make sacrifices
for their soul, but not for murder," he added, instinctively connecting
the conversation with the ideas that had been absorbing his mind.

"‘I bring not peace, but a sword,’ says Christ," Sergey Ivanovitch
rejoined for his part, quoting as simply as though it were the easiest
thing to understand the very passage that had always puzzled Levin most.

Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated, but at having
failed to control himself and being drawn into argument.

He wanted to say too that if public opinion were an infallible guide,
then why were not revolutions and the commune as lawful as the movement
in favor of the Slavonic peoples? But these were merely thoughts that
could settle nothing. One thing could be seen beyond doubt—that was that
at the actual moment the discussion was irritating Sergey Ivanovitch,
and so it was wrong to continue it. And Levin ceased speaking and then
called the attention of his guests to the fact that the storm clouds
were gathering, and that they had better be going home before it rained.

"Katerina Alexandrovna?" Levin asked of Agafea Mihalovna, who met them
with kerchiefs and rugs in the hall.

Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.

In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had moved on, covering
the sun so completely that it was dark as an eclipse. Stubbornly, as
though insisting on its rights, the wind stopped Levin, and tearing the
leaves and flowers off the lime trees and stripping the white birch
branches into strange unseemly nakedness, it twisted everything on one
side—acacias, flowers, burdocks, long grass, and tall tree-tops. The
peasant girls working in the garden ran shrieking into shelter in the
servants’ quarters. The streaming rain had already flung its white veil
over all the distant forest and half the fields close by, and was
rapidly swooping down upon the copse. The wet of the rain spurting up in
tiny drops could be smelt in the air.

Holding his head bent down before him, and struggling with the wind that
strove to tear the wraps away from him, Levin was moving up to the copse
and had just caught sight of something white behind the oak tree, when
there was a sudden flash, the whole earth seemed on fire, and the vault
of heaven seemed crashing overhead. Opening his blinded eyes, Levin
gazed through the thick veil of rain that separated him now from the
copse, and to his horror the first thing he saw was the green crest of
the familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copse uncannily changing its
position. "Can it have been struck?" Levin hardly had time to think
when, moving more and more rapidly, the oak tree vanished behind the
other trees, and he heard the crash of the great tree falling upon the
others.

The flash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the instantaneous
chill that ran through him were all merged for Levin in one sense of
terror.

They were at the other end of the copse under an old lime-tree; they
were calling him. Two figures in dark dresses (they had been light
summer dresses when they started out) were standing bending over
something. It was Kitty with the nurse. The rain was already ceasing,
and it was beginning to get light when Levin reached them. The nurse was
not wet on the lower part of her dress, but Kitty was drenched through,
and her soaked clothes clung to her. Though the rain was over, they
still stood in the same position in which they had been standing when
the storm broke. Both stood bending over a perambulator with a green
umbrella.

They gathered up the baby’s wet belongings; the nurse picked up the baby
and carried it. Levin walked beside his wife, and, penitent for having
been angry, he squeezed her hand when the nurse was not looking.

During the whole of that day, in the extremely different conversations
in which he took part, only as it were with the top layer of his mind,
in spite of the disappointment of not finding the change he expected in
himself, Levin had been all the while joyfully conscious of the fulness
of his heart.

A few minutes after Kitty had left the room she sent for Levin to come
to the nursery.

Leaving his tea, and regretfully interrupting the interesting
conversation, and at the same time uneasily wondering why he had been
sent for, as this only happened on important occasions, Levin went to
the nursery.

As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment was tried, and it
was completely successful. The cook, sent for with this object, bent
over the baby. He frowned and shook his head disapprovingly. Kitty bent
down to him, he gave her a beaming smile, propped his little hands on
the sponge and chirruped, making such a queer little contented sound
with his lips, that Kitty and the nurse were not alone in their
admiration. Levin, too, was surprised and delighted.

Going out of the nursery and being again alone, Levin went back at once
to the thought, in which there was something not clear.

It was quite dark now, and in the south, where he was looking, there
were no clouds. The storm had drifted on to the opposite side of the
sky, and there were flashes of lightning and distant thunder from that
quarter. Levin listened to the monotonous drip from the lime trees in
the garden, and looked at the triangle of stars he knew so well, and the
Milky Way with its branches that ran through its midst. At each flash of
lightning the Milky Way, and even the bright stars, vanished, but as
soon as the lightning died away, they reappeared in their places as
though some hand had flung them back with careful aim.

"Well, what is it perplexes me?" Levin said to himself, feeling
beforehand that the solution of his difficulties was ready in his soul,
though he did not know it yet. "Yes, the one unmistakable, incontestable
manifestation of the Divinity is the law of right and wrong, which has
come into the world by revelation, and which I feel in myself, and in
the recognition of which—I don’t make myself, but whether I will or
not—I am made one with other men in one body of believers, which is
called the church. Well, but the Jews, the Mohammedans, the Confucians,
the Buddhists—what of them?" he put to himself the question he had
feared to face. "Can these hundreds of millions of men be deprived of
that highest blessing without which life has no meaning?" He pondered a
moment, but immediately corrected himself. "But what am I questioning?"
he said to himself. "I am questioning the relation to Divinity of all
the different religions of all mankind. I am questioning the universal
manifestation of God to all the world with all those misty blurs. What
am I about? To me individually, to my heart has been revealed a
knowledge beyond all doubt, and unattainable by reason, and here I am
obstinately trying to express that knowledge in reason and words.

"Very well, I’ll go directly," said Levin, standing up and kissing her.

