I desired her to be so kind as to call me at seven, and, promising to do
so, she withdrew. Then, having broken my long fast on a cup of tea and a
little thin bread and butter, I sat down beside the small, smouldering
fire, and amused myself with a hearty fit of crying; after which, I said
my prayers, and then, feeling considerably relieved, began to prepare for
bed. Finding that none of my luggage was brought up, I instituted a
search for the bell; and failing to discover any signs of such a
convenience in any corner of the room, I took my candle and ventured
through the long passage, and down the steep stairs, on a voyage of
discovery. Meeting a well-dressed female on the way, I told her what I
wanted; but not without considerable hesitation, as I was not quite sure
whether it was one of the upper servants, or Mrs. Murray herself: it
happened, however, to be the ladyâ€™s-maid. With the air of one conferring
an unusual favour, she vouchsafed to undertake the sending up of my
things; and when I had re-entered my room, and waited and wondered a long
time (greatly fearing that she had forgotten or neglected to perform her
promise, and doubting whether to keep waiting or go to bed, or go down
again), my hopes, at length, were revived by the sound of voices and
laughter, accompanied by the tramp of feet along the passage; and
presently the luggage was brought in by a rough-looking maid and a man,
neither of them very respectful in their demeanour to me. Having shut
the door upon their retiring footsteps, and unpacked a few of my things,
I betook myself to rest; gladly enough, for I was weary in body and mind.
