As I was not rich enough to possess a watch, I could not tell how time
was passing, except by observing the slowly lengthening shadows from the
window; which presented a side view, including a corner of the park, a
clump of trees whose topmost branches had been colonized by an
innumerable company of noisy rooks, and a high wall with a massive wooden
gate: no doubt communicating with the stable-yard, as a broad
carriage-road swept up to it from the park. The shadow of this wall soon
took possession of the whole of the ground as far as I could see, forcing
the golden sunlight to retreat inch by inch, and at last take refuge in
the very tops of the trees. Ere long, even they were left in shadow—the
shadow of the distant hills, or of the earth itself; and, in sympathy for
the busy citizens of the rookery, I regretted to see their habitation, so
lately bathed in glorious light, reduced to the sombre, work-a-day hue of
the lower world, or of my own world within. For a moment, such birds as
soared above the rest might still receive the lustre on their wings,
which imparted to their sable plumage the hue and brilliance of deep red
gold; at last, that too departed. Twilight came stealing on; the rooks
became more quiet; I became more weary, and wished I were going home
to-morrow. At length it grew dark; and I was thinking of ringing for a
candle, and betaking myself to bed, when my hostess appeared, with many
apologies for having neglected me so long, and laying all the blame upon
that ‘nasty old woman,’ as she called her mother-in-law.
