‘Oh, mamma’s so tiresome! As if I couldn’t take care of myself. She
bothered me before about Mr. Hatfield; and I told her she might trust me:
I never should forget my rank and station for the most delightful man
that ever breathed. I wish he would go down on his knees to-morrow, and
implore me to be his wife, that I might just show her how mistaken she is
in supposing that I could ever—Oh, it provokes me so! To think that I
could be such a fool as to fall in _love_! It is quite beneath the
dignity of a woman to do such a thing. Love! I detest the word! As
applied to one of our sex, I think it a perfect insult. A preference I
_might_ acknowledge; but never for one like poor Mr. Hatfield, who has
not seven hundred a year to bless himself with. I like to talk to him,
because he’s so clever and amusing—I wish Sir Thomas Ashby were half as
nice; besides, I must have _somebody_ to flirt with, and no one else has
the sense to come here; and when we go out, mamma won’t let me flirt with
anybody but Sir Thomas—if he’s there; and if he’s _not_ there, I’m bound
hand and foot, for fear somebody should go and make up some exaggerated
story, and put it into his head that I’m engaged, or likely to be
engaged, to somebody else; or, what is more probable, for fear his nasty
old mother should see or hear of my ongoings, and conclude that I’m not a
fit wife for her excellent son: as if the said son were not the greatest
scamp in Christendom; and as if any woman of common decency were not a
world too good for him.’
