My mother thought only of consoling my father, and paying our debts and
retrenching our expenditure by every available means; but my father was
completely overwhelmed by the calamity: health, strength, and spirits
sank beneath the blow, and he never wholly recovered them. In vain my
mother strove to cheer him, by appealing to his piety, to his courage, to
his affection for herself and us. That very affection was his greatest
torment: it was for our sakes he had so ardently longed to increase his
fortune—it was our interest that had lent such brightness to his hopes,
and that imparted such bitterness to his present distress. He now
tormented himself with remorse at having neglected my mother’s advice;
which would at least have saved him from the additional burden of debt—he
vainly reproached himself for having brought her from the dignity, the
ease, the luxury of her former station to toil with him through the cares
and toils of poverty. It was gall and wormwood to his soul to see that
splendid, highly-accomplished woman, once so courted and admired,
transformed into an active managing housewife, with hands and head
continually occupied with household labours and household economy. The
very willingness with which she performed these duties, the cheerfulness
with which she bore her reverses, and the kindness which withheld her
from imputing the smallest blame to him, were all perverted by this
ingenious self-tormentor into further aggravations of his sufferings.
And thus the mind preyed upon the body, and disordered the system of the
nerves, and they in turn increased the troubles of the mind, till by
action and reaction his health was seriously impaired; and not one of us
could convince him that the aspect of our affairs was not half so gloomy,
so utterly hopeless, as his morbid imagination represented it to be.
