Meantime, young Meltham was pretty frequent in his visits to the house or
transits past it; and, judging by Matildaâ€™s execrations and reproaches,
her sister paid more attention to him than civility required; in other
words, she carried on as animated a flirtation as the presence of her
parents would admit. She made some attempts to bring Mr. Hatfield once
more to her feet; but finding them unsuccessful, she repaid his haughty
indifference with still loftier scorn, and spoke of him with as much
disdain and detestation as she had formerly done of his curate. But,
amid all this, she never for a moment lost sight of Mr. Weston. She
embraced every opportunity of meeting him, tried every art to fascinate
him, and pursued him with as much perseverance as if she really loved him
and no other, and the happiness of her life depended upon eliciting a
return of affection. Such conduct was completely beyond my
comprehension. Had I seen it depicted in a novel, I should have thought
it unnatural; had I heard it described by others, I should have deemed it
a mistake or an exaggeration; but when I saw it with my own eyes, and
suffered from it too, I could only conclude that excessive vanity, like
drunkenness, hardens the heart, enslaves the faculties, and perverts the
feelings; and that dogs are not the only creatures which, when gorged to
the throat, will yet gloat over what they cannot devour, and grudge the
smallest morsel to a starving brother.
