I generally had more satisfaction in going alone than with either of the
young ladies; for they, chiefly owing to their defective education,
comported themselves towards their inferiors in a manner that was highly
disagreeable for me to witness. They never, in thought, exchanged places
with them; and, consequently, had no consideration for their feelings,
regarding them as an order of beings entirely different from themselves.
They would watch the poor creatures at their meals, making uncivil
remarks about their food, and their manner of eating; they would laugh at
their simple notions and provincial expressions, till some of them
scarcely durst venture to speak; they would call the grave elderly men
and women old fools and silly old blockheads to their faces: and all this
without meaning to offend. I could see that the people were often hurt
and annoyed by such conduct, though their fear of the ‘grand ladies’
prevented them from testifying any resentment; but _they_ never perceived
it. They thought that, as these cottagers were poor and untaught, they
must be stupid and brutish; and as long as they, their superiors,
condescended to talk to them, and to give them shillings and half-crowns,
or articles of clothing, they had a right to amuse themselves, even at
their expense; and the people must adore them as angels of light,
condescending to minister to their necessities, and enlighten their
humble dwellings.
