I walked home with Miss Matilda; but _he did not join us_. Matilda was
now sadly at a loss for amusement, and wofully in want of a companion:
her brothers at school, her sister married and gone, she too young to be
admitted into society; for which, from Rosalie’s example, she was in some
degree beginning to acquire a taste—a taste at least for the company of
certain classes of gentlemen; at this dull time of year—no hunting going
on, no shooting even—for, though she might not join in that, it was
_something_ to see her father or the gamekeeper go out with the dogs, and
to talk with them on their return, about the different birds they had
bagged. Now, also, she was denied the solace which the companionship of
the coachman, grooms, horses, greyhounds, and pointers might have
afforded; for her mother having, notwithstanding the disadvantages of a
country life, so satisfactorily disposed of her elder daughter, the pride
of her heart had begun seriously to turn her attention to the younger;
and, being truly alarmed at the roughness of her manners, and thinking it
high time to work a reform, had been roused at length to exert her
authority, and prohibited entirely the yards, stables, kennels, and
coach-house. Of course, she was not implicitly obeyed; but, indulgent as
she had hitherto been, when once her spirit was roused, her temper was
not so gentle as she required that of her governesses to be, and her will
was not to be thwarted with impunity. After many a scene of contention
between mother and daughter, many a violent outbreak which I was ashamed
to witness, in which the father’s authority was often called in to
confirm with oaths and threats the mother’s slighted prohibitions—for
even _he_ could see that ‘Tilly, though she would have made a fine lad,
was not quite what a young lady ought to be’—Matilda at length found that
her easiest plan was to keep clear of the forbidden regions; unless she
could now and then steal a visit without her watchful mother’s knowledge.
