But this time I was pretty sure of an hour or two to myself; for Matilda
was preparing for a long ride, and Rosalie was dressing for a
dinner-party at Lady Ashby’s: so I took the opportunity of repairing to
the widow’s cottage, where I found her in some anxiety about her cat,
which had been absent all day. I comforted her with as many anecdotes of
that animal’s roving propensities as I could recollect. ‘I’m feared o’
th’ gamekeepers,’ said she: ‘that’s all ’at I think on. If th’ young
gentlemen had been at home, I should a’ thought they’d been setting their
dogs at her, an’ worried her, poor thing, as they did _many_ a poor
thing’s cat; but I haven’t that to be feared on now.’ Nancy’s eyes were
better, but still far from well: she had been trying to make a Sunday
shirt for her son, but told me she could only bear to do a little bit at
it now and then, so that it progressed but slowly, though the poor lad
wanted it sadly. So I proposed to help her a little, after I had read to
her, for I had plenty of time that evening, and need not return till
dusk. She thankfully accepted the offer. ‘An’ you’ll be a bit o’
company for me too, Miss,’ said she; ‘I like as I feel lonesome without
my cat.’ But when I had finished reading, and done the half of a seam,
with Nancy’s capacious brass thimble fitted on to my finger by means of a
roll of paper, I was disturbed by the entrance of Mr. Weston, with the
identical cat in his arms. I now saw that he could smile, and very
pleasantly too.
