‘Yes, of course: the young lady’s proficiency and elegance is of more
consequence to the governess than her own, as well as to the world. If
she wishes to prosper in her vocation she must devote all her energies to
her business: all her ideas and all her ambition will tend to the
accomplishment of that one object. When we wish to decide upon the
merits of a governess, we naturally look at the young ladies she
professes to have educated, and judge accordingly. The _judicious_
governess knows this: she knows that, while she lives in obscurity
herself, her pupils’ virtues and defects will be open to every eye; and
that, unless she loses sight of herself in their cultivation, she need
not hope for success. You see, Miss Grey, it is just the same as any
other trade or profession: they that wish to prosper must devote
themselves body and soul to their calling; and if they begin to yield to
indolence or self-indulgence they are speedily distanced by wiser
competitors: there is little to choose between a person that ruins her
pupils by neglect, and one that corrupts them by her example. You will
excuse my dropping these little hints: you know it is all for your own
good. Many ladies would speak to you much more strongly; and many would
not trouble themselves to speak at all, but quietly look out for a
substitute. That, of course, would be the _easiest_ plan: but I know the
advantages of a place like this to a person in your situation; and I have
no desire to part with you, as I am sure you would do very well if you
will only think of these things and try to exert yourself a _little_
more: then, I am convinced, you would _soon_ acquire that delicate tact
which alone is wanting to give you a proper influence over the mind of
your pupil.’
