As there were no settled hours for study and play, I resolved to give my
pupils a certain task, which, with moderate attention, they could perform
in a short time; and till this was done, however weary I was, or however
perverse they might be, nothing short of parental interference should
induce me to suffer them to leave the schoolroom, even if I should sit
with my chair against the door to keep them in. Patience, Firmness, and
Perseverance were my only weapons; and these I resolved to use to the
utmost. I determined always strictly to fulfil the threats and promises
I made; and, to that end, I must be cautious to threaten and promise
nothing that I could not perform. Then, I would carefully refrain from
all useless irritability and indulgence of my own ill-temper: when they
behaved tolerably, I would be as kind and obliging as it was in my power
to be, in order to make the widest possible distinction between good and
bad conduct; I would reason with them, too, in the simplest and most
effective manner. When I reproved them, or refused to gratify their
wishes, after a glaring fault, it should be more in sorrow than in anger:
their little hymns and prayers I would make plain and clear to their
understanding; when they said their prayers at night and asked pardon for
their offences, I would remind them of the sins of the past day,
solemnly, but in perfect kindness, to avoid raising a spirit of
opposition; penitential hymns should be said by the naughty, cheerful
ones by the comparatively good; and every kind of instruction I would
convey to them, as much as possible, by entertaining discourseâ€”apparently
with no other object than their present amusement in view.
