I will not inflict upon my readers an account of my leaving home on that
dark winter morning: the fond farewells, the long, long journey to O---,
the solitary waitings in inns for coaches or trains—for there were some
railways then—and, finally, the meeting at O--- with Mr. Murray’s
servant, who had been sent with the phaeton to drive me from thence to
Horton Lodge. I will just state that the heavy snow had thrown such
impediments in the way of both horses and steam-engines, that it was dark
some hours before I reached my journey’s end, and that a most bewildering
storm came on at last, which made the few miles’ space between O--- and
Horton Lodge a long and formidable passage. I sat resigned, with the
cold, sharp snow drifting through my veil and filling my lap, seeing
nothing, and wondering how the unfortunate horse and driver could make
their way even as well as they did; and indeed it was but a toilsome,
creeping style of progression, to say the best of it. At length we
paused; and, at the call of the driver, someone unlatched and rolled back
upon their creaking hinges what appeared to be the park gates. Then we
proceeded along a smoother road, whence, occasionally, I perceived some
huge, hoary mass gleaming through the darkness, which I took to be a
portion of a snow-clad tree. After a considerable time we paused again,
before the stately portico of a large house with long windows descending
to the ground.
