Yet Tom was by no means the most unmanageable of my pupils: sometimes, to
my great joy, he would have the sense to see that his wisest policy was
to finish his tasks, and go out and amuse himself till I and his sisters
came to join him; which frequently was not at all, for Mary Ann seldom
followed his example in this particular: she apparently preferred rolling
on the floor to any other amusement: down she would drop like a leaden
weight; and when I, with great difficulty, had succeeded in rooting her
thence, I had still to hold her up with one arm, while with the other I
held the book from which she was to read or spell her lesson. As the
dead weight of the big girl of six became too heavy for one arm to bear,
I transferred it to the other; or, if both were weary of the burden, I
carried her into a corner, and told her she might come out when she
should find the use of her feet, and stand up: but she generally
preferred lying there like a log till dinner or tea-time, when, as I
could not deprive her of her meals, she must be liberated, and would come
crawling out with a grin of triumph on her round, red face. Often she
would stubbornly refuse to pronounce some particular word in her lesson;
and now I regret the lost labour I have had in striving to conquer her
obstinacy. If I had passed it over as a matter of no consequence, it
would have been better for both parties, than vainly striving to overcome
it as I did; but I thought it my absolute duty to crush this vicious
tendency in the bud: and so it was, if I could have done it; and had my
powers been less limited, I might have enforced obedience; but, as it
was, it was a trial of strength between her and me, in which she
generally came off victorious; and every victory served to encourage and
strengthen her for a future contest. In vain I argued, coaxed,
entreated, threatened, scolded; in vain I kept her in from play, or, if
obliged to take her out, refused to play with her, or to speak kindly or
have anything to do with her; in vain I tried to set before her the
advantages of doing as she was bid, and being loved, and kindly treated
in consequence, and the disadvantages of persisting in her absurd
perversity. Sometimes, when she would ask me to do something for her, I
would answer,—‘Yes, I will, Mary Ann, if you will only say that word.
Come! you’d better say it at once, and have no more trouble about it.’
