‘No; I only thought so: I did not half know him really. I know you
warned me against it, and I wish I had listened to you: but it’s too late
to regret that now. And besides, mamma ought to have known better than
either of us, and she never said anything against it—quite the contrary.
And then I thought he adored me, and would let me have my own way: he did
pretend to do so at first, but now he does not care a bit about me. Yet
I should not care for that: he might do as he pleased, if I might only be
free to amuse myself and to stay in London, or have a few friends down
here: but _he will_ do as he pleases, and I must be a prisoner and a
slave. The moment he saw I could enjoy myself without him, and that
others knew my value better than himself, the selfish wretch began to
accuse me of coquetry and extravagance; and to abuse Harry Meltham, whose
shoes he was not worthy to clean. And then he must needs have me down in
the country, to lead the life of a nun, lest I should dishonour him or
bring him to ruin; as if he had not been ten times worse every way, with
his betting-book, and his gaming-table, and his opera-girls, and his Lady
This and Mrs. That—yes, and his bottles of wine, and glasses of
brandy-and-water too! Oh, I would give ten thousand worlds to be Miss
Murray again! It is _too_ bad to feel life, health, and beauty wasting
away, unfelt and unenjoyed, for such a brute as that!’ exclaimed she,
fairly bursting into tears in the bitterness of her vexation.
