Rosalie was pleased with the thoughts of becoming mistress of Ashby Park;
she was elated with the prospect of the bridal ceremony and its attendant
splendour and éclat, the honeymoon spent abroad, and the subsequent
gaieties she expected to enjoy in London and elsewhere; she appeared
pretty well pleased too, for the time being, with Sir Thomas himself,
because she had so lately seen him, danced with him, and been flattered
by him; but, after all, she seemed to shrink from the idea of being so
soon united: she wished the ceremony to be delayed some months, at least;
and I wished it too. It seemed a horrible thing to hurry on the
inauspicious match, and not to give the poor creature time to think and
reason on the irrevocable step she was about to take. I made no
pretension to ‘a mother’s watchful, anxious care,’ but I was amazed and
horrified at Mrs. Murray’s heartlessness, or want of thought for the real
good of her child; and by my unheeded warnings and exhortations, I vainly
strove to remedy the evil. Miss Murray only laughed at what I said; and
I soon found that her reluctance to an immediate union arose chiefly from
a desire to do what execution she could among the young gentlemen of her
acquaintance, before she was incapacitated from further mischief of the
kind. It was for this cause that, before confiding to me the secret of
her engagement, she had extracted a promise that I would not mention a
word on the subject to any one. And when I saw this, and when I beheld
her plunge more recklessly than ever into the depths of heartless
coquetry, I had no more pity for her. ‘Come what will,’ I thought, ‘she
deserves it. Sir Thomas cannot be too bad for her; and the sooner she is
incapacitated from deceiving and injuring others the better.’
