Master Charles was his mother’s peculiar darling. He was little more
than a year younger than John, but much smaller, paler, and less active
and robust; a pettish, cowardly, capricious, selfish little fellow, only
active in doing mischief, and only clever in inventing falsehoods: not
simply to hide his faults, but, in mere malicious wantonness, to bring
odium upon others. In fact, Master Charles was a very great nuisance to
me: it was a trial of patience to live with him peaceably; to watch over
him was worse; and to teach him, or pretend to teach him, was
inconceivable. At ten years old, he could not read correctly the easiest
line in the simplest book; and as, according to his mother’s principle,
he was to be told every word, before he had time to hesitate or examine
its orthography, and never even to be informed, as a stimulant to
exertion, that other boys were more forward than he, it is not surprising
that he made but little progress during the two years I had charge of his
education. His minute portions of Latin grammar, &c., were to be
repeated over to him, till he chose to say he knew them, and then he was
to be helped to say them; if he made mistakes in his little easy sums in
arithmetic, they were to be shown him at once, and the sum done for him,
instead of his being left to exercise his faculties in finding them out
himself; so that, of course, he took no pains to avoid mistakes, but
frequently set down his figures at random, without any calculation at
all.
