The task of instruction was as arduous for the body as the mind. I had
to run after my pupils to catch them, to carry or drag them to the table,
and often forcibly to hold them there till the lesson was done. Tom I
frequently put into a corner, seating myself before him in a chair, with
a book which contained the little task that must be said or read, before
he was released, in my hand. He was not strong enough to push both me
and the chair away, so he would stand twisting his body and face into the
most grotesque and singular contortions—laughable, no doubt, to an
unconcerned spectator, but not to me—and uttering loud yells and doleful
outcries, intended to represent weeping but wholly without the
accompaniment of tears. I knew this was done solely for the purpose of
annoying me; and, therefore, however I might inwardly tremble with
impatience and irritation, I manfully strove to suppress all visible
signs of molestation, and affected to sit with calm indifference, waiting
till it should please him to cease this pastime, and prepare for a run in
the garden, by casting his eye on the book and reading or repeating the
few words he was required to say. Sometimes he was determined to do his
writing badly; and I had to hold his hand to prevent him from purposely
blotting or disfiguring the paper. Frequently I threatened that, if he
did not do better, he should have another line: then he would stubbornly
refuse to write this line; and I, to save my word, had finally to resort
to the expedient of holding his fingers upon the pen, and forcibly
drawing his hand up and down, till, in spite of his resistance, the line
was in some sort completed.
