She now became extremely beneficent to the poor cottagers. Her
acquaintance among them was more widely extended, her visits to their
humble dwellings were more frequent and excursive than they had ever been
before. Hereby, she earned among them the reputation of a condescending
and very charitable young lady; and their encomiums were sure to be
repeated to Mr. Weston: whom also she had thus a daily chance of meeting
in one or other of their abodes, or in her transits to and fro; and
often, likewise, she could gather, through their gossip, to what places
he was likely to go at such and such a time, whether to baptize a child,
or to visit the aged, the sick, the sad, or the dying; and most skilfully
she laid her plans accordingly. In these excursions she would sometimes
go with her sister—whom, by some means, she had persuaded or bribed to
enter into her schemes—sometimes alone, never, now, with me; so that I
was debarred the pleasure of seeing Mr. Weston, or hearing his voice even
in conversation with another: which would certainly have been a very
great pleasure, however hurtful or however fraught with pain. I could
not even see him at church: for Miss Murray, under some trivial pretext,
chose to take possession of that corner in the family pew which had been
mine ever since I came; and, unless I had the presumption to station
myself between Mr. and Mrs. Murray, I must sit with my back to the
pulpit, which I accordingly did.
