I remember one afternoon in spring, when, owing to the rain, they could
not go out; but, by some amazing good fortune, they had all finished
their lessons, and yet abstained from running down to tease their
parents—a trick that annoyed me greatly, but which, on rainy days, I
seldom could prevent their doing; because, below, they found novelty and
amusement—especially when visitors were in the house; and their mother,
though she bid me keep them in the schoolroom, would never chide them for
leaving it, or trouble herself to send them back. But this day they
appeared satisfied with, their present abode, and what is more wonderful
still, seemed disposed to play together without depending on me for
amusement, and without quarrelling with each other. Their occupation was
a somewhat puzzling one: they were all squatted together on the floor by
the window, over a heap of broken toys and a quantity of birds’ eggs—or
rather egg-shells, for the contents had luckily been abstracted. These
shells they had broken up and were pounding into small fragments, to what
end I could not imagine; but so long as they were quiet and not in
positive mischief, I did not care; and, with a feeling of unusual repose,
I sat by the fire, putting the finishing stitches to a frock for Mary
Ann’s doll; intending, when that was done, to begin a letter to my
mother. Suddenly the door opened, and the dingy head of Mr. Bloomfield
looked in.
