Mr. Robson likewise encouraged Tom’s propensity to persecute the lower
creation, both by precept and example. As he frequently came to course
or shoot over his brother-in-law’s grounds, he would bring his favourite
dogs with him; and he treated them so brutally that, poor as I was, I
would have given a sovereign any day to see one of them bite him,
provided the animal could have done it with impunity. Sometimes, when in
a very complacent mood, he would go a-birds’-nesting with the children, a
thing that irritated and annoyed me exceedingly; as, by frequent and
persevering attempts, I flattered myself I had partly shown them the evil
of this pastime, and hoped, in time, to bring them to some general sense
of justice and humanity; but ten minutes’ birds’-nesting with uncle
Robson, or even a laugh from him at some relation of their former
barbarities, was sufficient at once to destroy the effect of my whole
elaborate course of reasoning and persuasion. Happily, however, during
that spring, they never, but once, got anything but empty nests, or
eggs—being too impatient to leave them till the birds were hatched; that
once, Tom, who had been with his uncle into the neighbouring plantation,
came running in high glee into the garden, with a brood of little callow
nestlings in his hands. Mary Ann and Fanny, whom I was just bringing
out, ran to admire his spoils, and to beg each a bird for themselves.
‘No, not one!’ cried Tom. ‘They’re all mine; uncle Robson gave them to
me—one, two, three, four, five—you shan’t touch one of them! no, not one,
for your lives!’ continued he, exultingly; laying the nest on the ground,
and standing over it with his legs wide apart, his hands thrust into his
breeches-pockets, his body bent forward, and his face twisted into all
manner of contortions in the ecstasy of his delight.
