Yet think not I have any dreadful disclosures to make: she was lively,
light-hearted, and could be very agreeable, with those who did not cross
her will. Towards me, when I first came, she was cold and haughty, then
insolent and overbearing; but, on a further acquaintance, she gradually
laid aside her airs, and in time became as deeply attached to me as it
was possible for _her_ to be to one of my character and position: for she
seldom lost sight, for above half an hour at a time, of the fact of my
being a hireling and a poor curate’s daughter. And yet, upon the whole,
I believe she respected me more than she herself was aware of; because I
was the only person in the house who steadily professed good principles,
habitually spoke the truth, and generally endeavoured to make inclination
bow to duty; and this I say, not, of course, in commendation of myself,
but to show the unfortunate state of the family to which my services
were, for the present, devoted. There was no member of it in whom I
regretted this sad want of principle so much as Miss Murray herself; not
only because she had taken a fancy to me, but because there was so much
of what was pleasant and prepossessing in herself, that, in spite of her
failings, I really liked her—when she did not rouse my indignation, or
ruffle my temper by _too_ great a display of her faults. These, however,
I would fain persuade myself were rather the effect of her education than
her disposition: she had never been perfectly taught the distinction
between right and wrong; she had, like her brothers and sisters, been
suffered, from infancy, to tyrannize over nurses, governesses, and
servants; she had not been taught to moderate her desires, to control her
temper or bridle her will, or to sacrifice her own pleasure for the good
of others. Her temper being naturally good, she was never violent or
morose, but from constant indulgence, and habitual scorn of reason, she
was often testy and capricious; her mind had never been cultivated: her
intellect, at best, was somewhat shallow; she possessed considerable
vivacity, some quickness of perception, and some talent for music and the
acquisition of languages, but till fifteen she had troubled herself to
acquire nothing;—then the love of display had roused her faculties, and
induced her to apply herself, but only to the more showy accomplishments.
And when I came it was the same: everything was neglected but French,
German, music, singing, dancing, fancy-work, and a little drawing—such
drawing as might produce the greatest show with the smallest labour, and
the principal parts of which were generally done by me. For music and
singing, besides my occasional instructions, she had the attendance of
the best master the country afforded; and in these accomplishments, as
well as in dancing, she certainly attained great proficiency. To music,
indeed, she devoted too much of her time, as, governess though I was, I
frequently told her; but her mother thought that if _she_ liked it, she
_could_ not give too much time to the acquisition of so attractive an
art. Of fancy-work I knew nothing but what I gathered from my pupil and
my own observation; but no sooner was I initiated, than she made me
useful in twenty different ways: all the tedious parts of her work were
shifted on to my shoulders; such as stretching the frames, stitching in
the canvas, sorting the wools and silks, putting in the grounds, counting
the stitches, rectifying mistakes, and finishing the pieces she was tired
of.
