When we are harassed by sorrows or anxieties, or long oppressed by any
powerful feelings which we must keep to ourselves, for which we can
obtain and seek no sympathy from any living creature, and which yet we
cannot, or will not wholly crush, we often naturally seek relief in
poetry—and often find it, too—whether in the effusions of others, which
seem to harmonize with our existing case, or in our own attempts to give
utterance to those thoughts and feelings in strains less musical,
perchance, but more appropriate, and therefore more penetrating and
sympathetic, and, for the time, more soothing, or more powerful to rouse
and to unburden the oppressed and swollen heart. Before this time, at
Wellwood House and here, when suffering from home-sick melancholy, I had
sought relief twice or thrice at this secret source of consolation; and
now I flew to it again, with greater avidity than ever, because I seemed
to need it more. I still preserve those relics of past sufferings and
experience, like pillars of witness set up in travelling through the vale
of life, to mark particular occurrences. The footsteps are obliterated
now; the face of the country may be changed; but the pillar is still
there, to remind me how all things were when it was reared. Lest the
reader should be curious to see any of these effusions, I will favour him
with one short specimen: cold and languid as the lines may seem, it was
almost a passion of grief to which they owed their being:—
