Miss Matilda Murray was a veritable hoyden, of whom little need be said.
She was about two years and a half younger than her sister; her features
were larger, her complexion much darker. She might possibly make a
handsome woman; but she was far too big-boned and awkward ever to be
called a pretty girl, and at present she cared little about it. Rosalie
knew all her charms, and thought them even greater than they were, and
valued them more highly than she ought to have done, had they been three
times as great; Matilda thought she was well enough, but cared little
about the matter; still less did she care about the cultivation of her
mind, and the acquisition of ornamental accomplishments. The manner in
which she learnt her lessons and practised her music was calculated to
drive any governess to despair. Short and easy as her tasks were, if
done at all, they were slurred over, at any time and in any way; but
generally at the least convenient times, and in the way least beneficial
to herself, and least satisfactory to me: the short half-hour of
practising was horribly strummed through; she, meantime, unsparingly
abusing me, either for interrupting her with corrections, or for not
rectifying her mistakes before they were made, or something equally
unreasonable. Once or twice, I ventured to remonstrate with her
seriously for such irrational conduct; but on each of those occasions, I
received such reprehensive expostulations from her mother, as convinced
me that, if I wished to keep the situation, I must even let Miss Matilda
go on in her own way.
