Another troublesome trait in Mary Ann was her incorrigible propensity to
keep running into the nursery, to play with her little sisters and the
nurse. This was natural enough, but, as it was against her mother’s
express desire, I, of course, forbade her to do so, and did my utmost to
keep her with me; but that only increased her relish for the nursery, and
the more I strove to keep her out of it, the oftener she went, and the
longer she stayed, to the great dissatisfaction of Mrs. Bloomfield, who,
I well knew, would impute all the blame of the matter to me. Another of
my trials was the dressing in the morning: at one time she would not be
washed; at another she would not be dressed, unless she might wear some
particular frock, that I knew her mother would not like her to have; at
another she would scream and run away if I attempted to touch her hair.
So that, frequently, when, after much trouble and toil, I had, at length,
succeeded in bringing her down, the breakfast was nearly half over; and
black looks from ‘mamma,’ and testy observations from ‘papa,’ spoken at
me, if not to me, were sure to be my meed: for few things irritated the
latter so much as want of punctuality at meal times. Then, among the
minor annoyances, was my inability to satisfy Mrs. Bloomfield with her
daughter’s dress; and the child’s hair ‘was never fit to be seen.’
Sometimes, as a powerful reproach to me, she would perform the office of
tire woman herself, and then complain bitterly of the trouble it gave
her.
