I set myself with befitting energy to discharge the duties of this new
mode of life. I call it _new_, for there was, indeed, a considerable
difference between working with my mother in a school of our own, and
working as a hireling among strangers, despised and trampled upon by old
and young; and for the first few weeks I was by no means unhappy. ‘It is
possible we may meet again,’ and ‘will it be of any consequence to you
whether we do or not?’—Those words still rang in my ear and rested on my
heart: they were my secret solace and support. ‘I shall see him
again.—He will come; or he will write.’ No promise, in fact, was too
bright or too extravagant for Hope to whisper in my ear. I did not
believe half of what she told me: I pretended to laugh at it all; but I
was far more credulous than I myself supposed; otherwise, why did my
heart leap up when a knock was heard at the front door, and the maid, who
opened it, came to tell my mother a gentleman wished to see her? and why
was I out of humour for the rest of the day, because it proved to be a
music-master come to offer his services to our school? and what stopped
my breath for a moment, when the postman having brought a couple of
letters, my mother said, ‘Here, Agnes, this is for you,’ and threw one of
them to me? and what made the hot blood rush into my face when I saw it
was directed in a gentleman’s hand? and why—oh! why did that cold,
sickening sense of disappointment fall upon me, when I had torn open the
cover and found it was _only_ a letter from Mary, which, for some reason
or other, her husband had directed for her?
