I did hear him preach, and was decidedly pleased with the evangelical
truth of his doctrine, as well as the earnest simplicity of his manner,
and the clearness and force of his style. It was truly refreshing to
hear such a sermon, after being so long accustomed to the dry, prosy
discourses of the former curate, and the still less edifying harangues of
the rector. Mr. Hatfield would come sailing up the aisle, or rather
sweeping along like a whirlwind, with his rich silk gown flying behind
him and rustling against the pew doors, mount the pulpit like a conqueror
ascending his triumphal car; then, sinking on the velvet cushion in an
attitude of studied grace, remain in silent prostration for a certain
time; then mutter over a Collect, and gabble through the Lordâ€™s Prayer,
rise, draw off one bright lavender glove, to give the congregation the
benefit of his sparkling rings, lightly pass his fingers through his
well-curled hair, flourish a cambric handkerchief, recite a very short
passage, or, perhaps, a mere phrase of Scripture, as a head-piece to his
discourse, and, finally, deliver a composition which, as a composition,
might be considered good, though far too studied and too artificial to be
pleasing to me: the propositions were well laid down, the arguments
logically conducted; and yet, it was sometimes hard to listen quietly
throughout, without some slight demonstrations of disapproval or
impatience.
