The senior Mrs. Bloomfield had been very attentive and civil to me; and
till now I had thought her a nice, kind-hearted, chatty old body. She
would often come to me and talk in a confidential strain; nodding and
shaking her head, and gesticulating with hands and eyes, as a certain
class of old ladies are wonâ€™t to do; though I never knew one that carried
the peculiarity to so great an extent. She would even sympathise with me
for the trouble I had with the children, and express at times, by half
sentences, interspersed with nods and knowing winks, her sense of the
injudicious conduct of their mamma in so restricting my power, and
neglecting to support me with her authority. Such a mode of testifying
disapprobation was not much to my taste; and I generally refused to take
it in, or understand anything more than was openly spoken; at least, I
never went farther than an implied acknowledgment that, if matters were
otherwise ordered my task would be a less difficult one, and I should be
better able to guide and instruct my charge; but now I must be doubly
cautious. Hitherto, though I saw the old lady had her defects (of which
one was a proneness to proclaim her perfections), I had always been
wishful to excuse them, and to give her credit for all the virtues she
professed, and even imagine others yet untold. Kindness, which had been
the food of my life through so many years, had lately been so entirely
denied me, that I welcomed with grateful joy the slightest semblance of
it. No wonder, then, that my heart warmed to the old lady, and always
gladdened at her approach and regretted her departure.
