We are naturally disposed to love what gives us pleasure, and what more
pleasing than a beautiful face—when we know no harm of the possessor at
least? A little girl loves her bird—Why? Because it lives and feels;
because it is helpless and harmless? A toad, likewise, lives and feels,
and is equally helpless and harmless; but though she would not hurt a
toad, she cannot love it like the bird, with its graceful form, soft
feathers, and bright, speaking eyes. If a woman is fair and amiable, she
is praised for both qualities, but especially the former, by the bulk of
mankind: if, on the other hand, she is disagreeable in person and
character, her plainness is commonly inveighed against as her greatest
crime, because, to common observers, it gives the greatest offence;
while, if she is plain and good, provided she is a person of retired
manners and secluded life, no one ever knows of her goodness, except her
immediate connections. Others, on the contrary, are disposed to form
unfavourable opinions of her mind, and disposition, if it be but to
excuse themselves for their instinctive dislike of one so unfavoured by
nature; and _visa versâ_ with her whose angel form conceals a vicious
heart, or sheds a false, deceitful charm over defects and foibles that
would not be tolerated in another. They that have beauty, let them be
thankful for it, and make a good use of it, like any other talent; they
that have it not, let them console themselves, and do the best they can
without it: certainly, though liable to be over-estimated, it is a gift
of God, and not to be despised. Many will feel this who have felt that
they could love, and whose hearts tell them that they are worthy to be
loved again; while yet they are debarred, by the lack of this or some
such seeming trifle, from giving and receiving that happiness they seem
almost made to feel and to impart. As well might the humble glowworm
despise that power of giving light without which the roving fly might
pass her and repass her a thousand times, and never rest beside her: she
might hear her winged darling buzzing over and around her; he vainly
seeking her, she longing to be found, but with no power to make her
presence known, no voice to call him, no wings to follow his flight;—the
fly must seek another mate, the worm must live and die alone.
