‘“Pardon me, Miss Murray,” said he, “I have loved you so intensely—I do
still adore you so deeply, that I would not willingly offend you; but
though I never have loved, and never _can_ love any woman as I have loved
you, it is equally certain that I never was so ill-treated by any. On
the contrary, I have always found your sex the kindest and most tender
and obliging of God’s creation, till now.” (Think of the conceited
fellow saying that!) “And the novelty and harshness of the lesson you
have taught me to-day, and the bitterness of being disappointed in the
only quarter on which the happiness of my life depended, must excuse any
appearance of asperity. If my presence is disagreeable to you, Miss
Murray,” he said (for I was looking about me to show how little I cared
for him, so he thought I was tired of him, I suppose)—“if my presence is
disagreeable to you, Miss Murray, you have only to promise me the favour
I named, and I will relieve you at once. There are many ladies—some even
in this parish—who would be delighted to accept what you have so
scornfully trampled under your feet. They would be naturally inclined to
hate one whose surpassing loveliness has so completely estranged my heart
from them and blinded me to their attractions; and a single hint of the
truth from me to one of these would be sufficient to raise such a talk
against you as would seriously injure your prospects, and diminish your
chance of success with any other gentleman you or your mamma might design
to entangle.”
