‘“It may seem a hard matter,” says he, “to love our neighbours, who have
so much of what is evil about them, and whose faults so often awaken the
evil that lingers within ourselves; but remember that _He_ made them, and
_He_ loves them; and whosoever loveth him that begat, loveth him that is
begotten also. And if God so loveth us, that He gave His only begotten
Son to die for us, we ought also to love one another. But if you cannot
feel positive affection for those who do not care for you, you can at
least try to do to them as you would they should do unto you: you can
endeavour to pity their failings and excuse their offences, and to do all
the good you can to those about you. And if you accustom yourself to
this, Nancy, the very effort itself will make you love them in some
degree—to say nothing of the goodwill your kindness would beget in them,
though they might have little else that is good about them. If we love
God and wish to serve Him, let us try to be like Him, to do His work, to
labour for His glory—which is the good of man—to hasten the coming of His
kingdom, which is the peace and happiness of all the world: however
powerless we may seem to be, in doing all the good we can through life,
the humblest of us may do much towards it: and let us dwell in love, that
He may dwell in us and we in Him. The more happiness we bestow, the more
we shall receive, even here; and the greater will be our reward in heaven
when we rest from our labours.” I believe, Miss, them is his very words,
for I’ve thought ’em ower many a time. An’ then he took that Bible, an’
read bits here and there, an’ explained ’em as clear as the day: and it
seemed like as a new light broke in on my soul; an’ I felt fair aglow
about my heart, an’ only wished poor Bill an’ all the world could ha’
been there, an’ heard it all, and rejoiced wi’ me.
