Mrs. Murray was a handsome, dashing lady of forty, who certainly required
neither rouge nor padding to add to her charms; and whose chief
enjoyments were, or seemed to be, in giving or frequenting parties, and
in dressing at the very top of the fashion. I did not see her till
eleven o’clock on the morning after my arrival; when she honoured me with
a visit, just as my mother might step into the kitchen to see a new
servant-girl: yet not so, either, for my mother would have seen her
immediately after her arrival, and not waited till the next day; and,
moreover, she would have addressed her in a more kind and friendly
manner, and given her some words of comfort as well as a plain exposition
of her duties; but Mrs. Murray did neither the one nor the other. She
just stepped into the schoolroom on her return from ordering dinner in
the housekeeper’s room, bade me good-morning, stood for two minutes by
the fire, said a few words about the weather and the ‘rather rough’
journey I must have had yesterday; petted her youngest child—a boy of
ten—who had just been wiping his mouth and hands on her gown, after
indulging in some savoury morsel from the housekeeper’s store; told me
what a sweet, good boy he was; and then sailed out, with a
self-complacent smile upon her face: thinking, no doubt, that she had
done quite enough for the present, and had been delightfully
condescending into the bargain. Her children evidently held the same
opinion, and I alone thought otherwise.
