Refreshed, delighted, invigorated, I walked along, forgetting all my
cares, feeling as if I had wings to my feet, and could go at least forty
miles without fatigue, and experiencing a sense of exhilaration to which
I had been an entire stranger since the days of early youth. About
half-past six, however, the grooms began to come down to air their
masters’ horses—first one, and then another, till there were some dozen
horses and five or six riders: but that need not trouble me, for they
would not come as far as the low rocks which I was now approaching. When
I had reached these, and walked over the moist, slippery sea-weed (at the
risk of floundering into one of the numerous pools of clear, salt water
that lay between them), to a little mossy promontory with the sea
splashing round it, I looked back again to see who next was stirring.
Still, there were only the early grooms with their horses, and one
gentleman with a little dark speck of a dog running before him, and one
water-cart coming out of the town to get water for the baths. In another
minute or two, the distant bathing machines would begin to move, and then
the elderly gentlemen of regular habits and sober quaker ladies would be
coming to take their salutary morning walks. But however interesting
such a scene might be, I could not wait to witness it, for the sun and
the sea so dazzled my eyes in that direction, that I could but afford one
glance; and then I turned again to delight myself with the sight and the
sound of the sea, dashing against my promontory—with no prodigious force,
for the swell was broken by the tangled sea-weed and the unseen rocks
beneath; otherwise I should soon have been deluged with spray. But the
tide was coming in; the water was rising; the gulfs and lakes were
filling; the straits were widening: it was time to seek some safer
footing; so I walked, skipped, and stumbled back to the smooth, wide
sands, and resolved to proceed to a certain bold projection in the
cliffs, and then return.
