So said my mother, as we sat at work one morning during the Easter
holidays. I assured her that my employments were not at all oppressive;
that I was well; or, if there was anything amiss, it would be gone as
soon as the trying months of spring were over: when summer came I should
be as strong and hearty as she could wish to see me: but inwardly her
observation startled me. I knew my strength was declining, my appetite
had failed, and I was grown listless and desponding;—and if, indeed, he
could never care for me, and I could never see him more—if I was
forbidden to minister to his happiness—forbidden, for ever, to taste the
joys of love, to bless, and to be blessed—then, life must be a burden,
and if my heavenly Father would call me away, I should be glad to rest.
But it would not do to die and leave my mother. Selfish, unworthy
daughter, to forget her for a moment! Was not her happiness committed in
a great measure to my charge?—and the welfare of our young pupils too?
Should I shrink from the work that God had set before me, because it was
not fitted to my taste? Did not He know best what I should do, and where
I ought to labour?—and should I long to quit His service before I had
finished my task, and expect to enter into His rest without having
laboured to earn it? ‘No; by His help I will arise and address myself
diligently to my appointed duty. If happiness in this world is not for
me, I will endeavour to promote the welfare of those around me, and my
reward shall be hereafter.’ So said I in my heart; and from that hour I
only permitted my thoughts to wander to Edward Weston—or at least to
dwell upon him now and then—as a treat for rare occasions: and, whether
it was really the approach of summer or the effect of these good
resolutions, or the lapse of time, or all together, tranquillity of mind
was soon restored; and bodily health and vigour began likewise, slowly,
but surely, to return.
