His favourite subjects were church discipline, rites and ceremonies,
apostolical succession, the duty of reverence and obedience to the
clergy, the atrocious criminality of dissent, the absolute necessity of
observing all the forms of godliness, the reprehensible presumption of
individuals who attempted to think for themselves in matters connected
with religion, or to be guided by their own interpretations of Scripture,
and, occasionally (to please his wealthy parishioners) the necessity of
deferential obedience from the poor to the rich—supporting his maxims and
exhortations throughout with quotations from the Fathers: with whom he
appeared to be far better acquainted than with the Apostles and
Evangelists, and whose importance he seemed to consider at least equal to
theirs. But now and then he gave us a sermon of a different order—what
some would call a very good one; but sunless and severe: representing the
Deity as a terrible taskmaster rather than a benevolent father. Yet, as
I listened, I felt inclined to think the man was sincere in all he said:
he must have changed his views, and become decidedly religious, gloomy
and austere, yet still devout. But such illusions were usually
dissipated, on coming out of church, by hearing his voice in jocund
colloquy with some of the Melthams or Greens, or, perhaps, the Murrays
themselves; probably laughing at his own sermon, and hoping that he had
given the rascally people something to think about; perchance, exulting
in the thought that old Betty Holmes would now lay aside the sinful
indulgence of her pipe, which had been her daily solace for upwards of
thirty years: that George Higgins would be frightened out of his Sabbath
evening walks, and Thomas Jackson would be sorely troubled in his
conscience, and shaken in his sure and certain hope of a joyful
resurrection at the last day.
