One bright day in the last week of February, I was walking in the park,
enjoying the threefold luxury of solitude, a book, and pleasant weather;
for Miss Matilda had set out on her daily ride, and Miss Murray was gone
in the carriage with her mamma to pay some morning calls. But it struck
me that I ought to leave these selfish pleasures, and the park with its
glorious canopy of bright blue sky, the west wind sounding through its
yet leafless branches, the snow-wreaths still lingering in its hollows,
but melting fast beneath the sun, and the graceful deer browsing on its
moist herbage already assuming the freshness and verdure of springâ€”and go
to the cottage of one Nancy Brown, a widow, whose son was at work all day
in the fields, and who was afflicted with an inflammation in the eyes;
which had for some time incapacitated her from reading: to her own great
grief, for she was a woman of a serious, thoughtful turn of mind. I
accordingly went, and found her alone, as usual, in her little, close,
dark cottage, redolent of smoke and confined air, but as tidy and clean
as she could make it. She was seated beside her little fire (consisting
of a few red cinders and a bit of stick), busily knitting, with a small
sackcloth cushion at her feet, placed for the accommodation of her gentle
friend the cat, who was seated thereon, with her long tail half
encircling her velvet paws, and her half-closed eyes dreamily gazing on
the low, crooked fender.
