I will not dilate upon the feelings with which I left the old house, the
well-known garden, the little village church—then doubly dear to me,
because my father, who, for thirty years, had taught and prayed within
its walls, lay slumbering now beneath its flags—and the old bare hills,
delightful in their very desolation, with the narrow vales between,
smiling in green wood and sparkling water—the house where I was born, the
scene of all my early associations, the place where throughout life my
earthly affections had been centred;—and left them to return no more!
True, I was going back to Horton Lodge, where, amid many evils, one
source of pleasure yet remained: but it was pleasure mingled with
excessive pain; and my stay, alas! was limited to six weeks. And even of
that precious time, day after day slipped by and I did not see him:
except at church, I never saw him for a fortnight after my return. It
seemed a long time to me: and, as I was often out with my rambling pupil,
of course hopes would keep rising, and disappointments would ensue; and
then, I would say to my own heart, ‘Here is a convincing proof—if you
would but have the sense to see it, or the candour to acknowledge it—that
he does not care for you. If he only thought _half_ as much about you as
you do about him, he would have contrived to meet you many times ere
this: you must know that, by consulting your own feelings. Therefore,
have done with this nonsense: you have no ground for hope: dismiss, at
once, these hurtful thoughts and foolish wishes from your mind, and turn
to your own duty, and the dull blank life that lies before you. You
might have known such happiness was not for you.’
