My father’s mortal remains had been consigned to the tomb; and we, with
sad faces and sombre garments, sat lingering over the frugal
breakfast-table, revolving plans for our future life. My mother’s strong
mind had not given way beneath even this affliction: her spirit, though
crushed, was not broken. Mary’s wish was that I should go back to Horton
Lodge, and that our mother should come and live with her and Mr.
Richardson at the vicarage: she affirmed that he wished it no less than
herself, and that such an arrangement could not fail to benefit all
parties; for my mother’s society and experience would be of inestimable
value to them, and they would do all they could to make her happy. But
no arguments or entreaties could prevail: my mother was determined not to
go. Not that she questioned, for a moment, the kind wishes and
intentions of her daughter; but she affirmed that so long as God spared
her health and strength, she would make use of them to earn her own
livelihood, and be chargeable to no one; whether her dependence would be
felt as a burden or not. If she could afford to reside as a lodger
in—vicarage, she would choose that house before all others as the place
of her abode; but not being so circumstanced, she would never come under
its roof, except as an occasional visitor: unless sickness or calamity
should render her assistance really needful, or until age or infirmity
made her incapable of maintaining herself.
