Whether I walked with the young ladies or rode with their parents,
depended upon their own capricious will: if they chose to ‘take’ me, I
went; if, for reasons best known to themselves, they chose to go alone, I
took my seat in the carriage. I liked walking better, but a sense of
reluctance to obtrude my presence on anyone who did not desire it, always
kept me passive on these and similar occasions; and I never inquired into
the causes of their varying whims. Indeed, this was the best policy—for
to submit and oblige was the governess’s part, to consult their own
pleasure was that of the pupils. But when I did walk, the first half of
journey was generally a great nuisance to me. As none of the
before-mentioned ladies and gentlemen ever noticed me, it was
disagreeable to walk beside them, as if listening to what they said, or
wishing to be thought one of them, while they talked over me, or across;
and if their eyes, in speaking, chanced to fall on me, it seemed as if
they looked on vacancy—as if they either did not see me, or were very
desirous to make it appear so. It was disagreeable, too, to walk behind,
and thus appear to acknowledge my own inferiority; for, in truth, I
considered myself pretty nearly as good as the best of them, and wished
them to know that I did so, and not to imagine that I looked upon myself
as a mere domestic, who knew her own place too well to walk beside such
fine ladies and gentlemen as they were—though her young ladies might
choose to have her with them, and even condescend to converse with her
when no better company were at hand. Thus—I am almost ashamed to confess
it—but indeed I gave myself no little trouble in my endeavours (if I did
keep up with them) to appear perfectly unconscious or regardless of their
presence, as if I were wholly absorbed in my own reflections, or the
contemplation of surrounding objects; or, if I lingered behind, it was
some bird or insect, some tree or flower, that attracted my attention,
and having duly examined that, I would pursue my walk alone, at a
leisurely pace, until my pupils had bidden adieu to their companions and
turned off into the quiet private road.
