Irritated as I was at their foolish mirth and vexatious imputations, the
uneasiness did not continue long: when they had had their laugh out, they
returned again to the captain and lieutenant; and, while they disputed
and commented upon them, my indignation rapidly cooled; the cause of it
was quickly forgotten, and I turned my thoughts into a pleasanter
channel. Thus we proceeded up the park, and entered the hall; and as I
ascended the stairs to my own chamber, I had but one thought within me:
my heart was filled to overflowing with one single earnest wish. Having
entered the room, and shut the door, I fell upon my knees and offered up
a fervent but not impetuous prayer: ‘Thy will be done,’ I strove to say
throughout; but, ‘Father, all things are possible with Thee, and may it
be Thy will,’ was sure to follow. That wish—that prayer—both men and
women would have scorned me for—‘But, Father, _Thou_ wilt _not_ despise!’
I said, and felt that it was true. It seemed to me that another’s
welfare was at least as ardently implored for as my own; nay, even _that_
was the principal object of my heart’s desire. I might have been
deceiving myself; but that idea gave me confidence to ask, and power to
hope I did not ask in vain. As for the primroses, I kept two of them in
a glass in my room until they were completely withered, and the housemaid
threw them out; and the petals of the other I pressed between the leaves
of my Bible—I have them still, and mean to keep them always.
