One such occasion I particularly well remember; it was a lovely afternoon
about the close of March; Mr. Green and his sisters had sent their
carriage back empty, in order to enjoy the bright sunshine and balmy air
in a sociable walk home along with their visitors, Captain Somebody and
Lieutenant Somebody-else (a couple of military fops), and the Misses
Murray, who, of course, contrived to join them. Such a party was highly
agreeable to Rosalie; but not finding it equally suitable to my taste, I
presently fell back, and began to botanise and entomologise along the
green banks and budding hedges, till the company was considerably in
advance of me, and I could hear the sweet song of the happy lark; then my
spirit of misanthropy began to melt away beneath the soft, pure air and
genial sunshine; but sad thoughts of early childhood, and yearnings for
departed joys, or for a brighter future lot, arose instead. As my eyes
wandered over the steep banks covered with young grass and green-leaved
plants, and surmounted by budding hedges, I longed intensely for some
familiar flower that might recall the woody dales or green hill-sides of
home: the brown moorlands, of course, were out of the question. Such a
discovery would make my eyes gush out with water, no doubt; but that was
one of my greatest enjoyments now. At length I descried, high up between
the twisted roots of an oak, three lovely primroses, peeping so sweetly
from their hiding-place that the tears already started at the sight; but
they grew so high above me, that I tried in vain to gather one or two, to
dream over and to carry with me: I could not reach them unless I climbed
the bank, which I was deterred from doing by hearing a footstep at that
moment behind me, and was, therefore, about to turn away, when I was
startled by the words, ‘Allow me to gather them for you, Miss Grey,’
spoken in the grave, low tones of a well-known voice. Immediately the
flowers were gathered, and in my hand. It was Mr. Weston, of course—who
else would trouble himself to do so much for _me_?
