“Yes,” replied Caderousse, “little Albert.”

Towards the beginning of the year 1838, two young men belonging to the
first society of Paris, the Viscount Albert de Morcerf and the Baron
Franz d’Épinay, were at Florence. They had agreed to see the Carnival at
Rome that year, and that Franz, who for the last three or four years had
inhabited Italy, should act as cicerone to Albert.

As it is no inconsiderable affair to spend the Carnival at Rome,
especially when you have no great desire to sleep on the Piazza del
Popolo, or the Campo Vaccino, they wrote to Signor Pastrini, the
proprietor of the Hôtel de Londres, Piazza di Spagna, to reserve
comfortable apartments for them. Signor Pastrini replied that he had
only two rooms and a parlor on the third floor, which he offered at the
low charge of a louis per diem. They accepted his offer; but wishing to
make the best use of the time that was left, Albert started for Naples.
As for Franz, he remained at Florence, and after having passed a few
days in exploring the paradise of the Cascine, and spending two or three
evenings at the houses of the Florentine nobility, he took a fancy into
his head (having already visited Corsica, the cradle of Bonaparte) to
visit Elba, the waiting-place of Napoleon.

At last he made his way through the mob, which was continually
increasing and getting more and more turbulent, and reached the hotel.
On his first inquiry he was told, with the impertinence peculiar to
hired hackney-coachmen and innkeepers with their houses full, that there
was no room for him at the Hôtel de Londres. Then he sent his card to
Signor Pastrini, and asked for Albert de Morcerf. This plan succeeded;
and Signor Pastrini himself ran to him, excusing himself for having made
his excellency wait, scolding the waiters, taking the candlestick from
the porter, who was ready to pounce on the traveller and was about to
lead him to Albert, when Morcerf himself appeared.

“What as to the carriage?” exclaimed Albert. “Come, come, Signor
Pastrini, no joking; we must have a carriage.”

Albert looked at Franz like a man who hears a reply he does not
understand.

“What is the matter?” said Albert, entering; “no carriage to be had?”

“Ah, that is something,” said Albert; “today is Thursday, and who knows
what may arrive between this and Sunday?”

“Well,” said Franz to Albert, “do you know what is the best thing we can
do? It is to pass the Carnival at Venice; there we are sure of obtaining
gondolas if we cannot have carriages.”

“Ah, the devil, no,” cried Albert; “I came to Rome to see the Carnival,
and I will, though I see it on stilts.”

“Parbleu!” said Albert, “do you think we are going to run about on foot
in the streets of Rome, like lawyers’ clerks?”

Franz and Albert descended, the carriage approached the palace; their
excellencies stretched their legs along the seats; the cicerone sprang
into the seat behind.

“To Saint Peter’s first, and then to the Colosseum,” returned Albert.
But Albert did not know that it takes a day to see Saint Peter’s, and a
month to study it. The day was passed at Saint Peter’s alone.

Suddenly the daylight began to fade away; Franz took out his watch—it
was half-past four. They returned to the hotel; at the door Franz
ordered the coachman to be ready at eight. He wished to show Albert the
Colosseum by moonlight, as he had shown him Saint Peter’s by daylight.
When we show a friend a city one has already visited, we feel the same
pride as when we point out a woman whose lover we have been.

“Did you come to tell us you have procured a carriage?” asked Albert,
lighting his cigar.

“But,” said Albert, emitting a volume of smoke and balancing his chair
on its hind legs, “only madmen, or blockheads like us, ever do travel.
Men in their senses do not quit their hotel in the Rue du Helder, their
walk on the Boulevard de Gand, and the Café de Paris.”

It is of course understood that Albert resided in the aforesaid street,
appeared every day on the fashionable walk, and dined frequently at the
only restaurant where you can really dine, that is, if you are on good
terms with its waiters.

“Pray, who may this famous Luigi Vampa be?” inquired Albert; “he may be
very famous at Rome, but I can assure you he is quite unknown at Paris.”

“Now then, Albert,” cried Franz, “here is a bandit for you at last.”

“Albert does not say you are a liar, Signor Pastrini,” said Franz, “but
that he will not believe what you are going to tell us,—but I will
believe all you say; so proceed.”

“On your honor, is that true?” cried Albert.

“Count,” returned Signor Pastrini, hurt at Albert’s repeated doubts of
the truth of his assertions, “I do not say this to you, but to your
companion, who knows Rome, and knows, too, that these things are not to
be laughed at.”

“My dear fellow,” said Albert, turning to Franz, “here is an admirable
adventure; we will fill our carriage with pistols, blunderbusses, and
double-barrelled guns. Luigi Vampa comes to take us, and we take him—we
bring him back to Rome, and present him to his holiness the Pope, who
asks how he can repay so great a service; then we merely ask for a
carriage and a pair of horses, and we see the Carnival in the carriage,
and doubtless the Roman people will crown us at the Capitol, and
proclaim us, like Curtius and Horatius Cocles, the preservers of their
country.”

Whilst Albert proposed this scheme, Signor Pastrini’s face assumed an
expression impossible to describe.

“Do you know, Signor Pastrini,” said Albert, lighting a second cigar at
the first, “that this practice is very convenient for bandits, and that
it seems to be due to an arrangement of their own.”

“What!” cried Albert, whose courage revolted at the idea of being
plundered tamely, “not make any resistance!”

“My dear Albert,” returned Franz, “your answer is sublime, and worthy
the ‘Let him die,’ of Corneille, only, when Horace made that answer, the
safety of Rome was concerned; but, as for us, it is only to gratify a
whim, and it would be ridiculous to risk our lives for so foolish a
motive.”

Albert poured himself out a glass of lacryma Christi, which he sipped at
intervals, muttering some unintelligible words.

“Let us see the watch,” said Albert.

“Peste!” returned Albert, “I compliment you on it; I have its fellow”—he
took his watch from his waistcoat pocket—“and it cost me 3,000 francs.”

“Pardieu!” cried Albert, “you are not a preacher, to remain standing!”

“What do you think of that, Albert?—at two-and-twenty to be thus
famous?”

“Of the middle height—about the same stature as his excellency,”
returned the host, pointing to Albert.

“Thanks for the comparison,” said Albert, with a bow.

“Well, and what may you have to say against this name?” inquired Albert;
“it is a very pretty name, and the adventures of the gentleman of that
name amused me very much in my youth, I must confess.”

“Well, my dear Albert,” said Franz, turning towards his friend; “what
think you of citizen Luigi Vampa?”

“I say he is a myth,” replied Albert, “and never had an existence.”

“Well, Albert,” inquired Franz of his companion, “are you still disposed
to go to the Colosseum by the outer wall?”

“Quite so,” said Albert, “if the way be picturesque.”

“Ah, my dear fellow,” said Albert, rising, and lighting his third cigar,
“really, I thought you had more courage.”

As for Albert and Franz, they essayed not to escape from their
ciceronian tyrants; and, indeed, it would have been so much the more
difficult to break their bondage, as the guides alone are permitted to
visit these monuments with torches in their hands. Thus, then, the young
men made no attempt at resistance, but blindly and confidingly
surrendered themselves into the care and custody of their conductors.

Scarcely, therefore, had the reflective Franz walked a hundred steps
beneath the interior porticoes of the ruin, when, abandoning Albert to
the guides (who would by no means yield their prescriptive right of
carrying their victims through the routine regularly laid down, and as
regularly followed by them, but dragged the unconscious visitor to the
various objects with a pertinacity that admitted of no appeal,
beginning, as a matter of course, with the “Lions’ Den”, the “Hall of
the Gladiators” and finishing with “Cæsar’s Podium”), to escape a jargon
and mechanical survey of the wonders by which he was surrounded, Franz
ascended a half-dilapidated staircase, and, leaving them to follow their
monotonous round, seated himself at the foot of a column, and
immediately opposite a large aperture, which permitted him to enjoy a
full and undisturbed view of the gigantic dimensions of the majestic
ruin.

Franz had remained for nearly a quarter of an hour perfectly hidden by
the shadow of the vast column at whose base he had found a resting-
place, and from whence his eyes followed the motions of Albert and his
guides, who, holding torches in their hands, had emerged from a
vomitorium at the opposite extremity of the Colosseum, and then again
disappeared down the steps conducting to the seats reserved for the
Vestal virgins, resembling, as they glided along, some restless shades
following the flickering glare of so many ignes fatui. All at once his
ear caught a sound resembling that of a stone rolling down the staircase
opposite the one by which he had himself ascended. There was nothing
remarkable in the circumstance of a fragment of granite giving way and
falling heavily below; but it seemed to him that the substance that fell
gave way beneath the pressure of a foot, and also that someone, who
endeavored as much as possible to prevent his footsteps from being
heard, was approaching the spot where he sat.

Saying these words, the Transteverin disappeared down the staircase,
while his companion, muffling his features more closely than before in
the folds of his mantle, passed almost close to Franz, and descended to
the arena by an outward flight of steps. The next minute Franz heard
himself called by Albert, who made the lofty building re-echo with the
sound of his friend’s name. Franz, however, did not obey the summons
till he had satisfied himself that the two men whose conversation he had
overheard were at a sufficient distance to prevent his encountering them
in his descent. In ten minutes after the strangers had departed, Franz
was on the road to the Piazza di Spagna, listening with studied
indifference to the learned dissertation delivered by Albert, after the
manner of Pliny and Calpurnius, touching the iron-pointed nets used to
prevent the ferocious beasts from springing on the spectators.

Worn out at length, he fell asleep at daybreak, and did not awake till
late. Like a genuine Frenchman, Albert had employed his time in
arranging for the evening’s diversion; he had sent to engage a box at
the Teatro Argentina; and Franz, having a number of letters to write,
relinquished the carriage to Albert for the whole of the day.

At five o’clock Albert returned, delighted with his day’s work; he had
been occupied in leaving his letters of introduction, and had received
in return more invitations to balls and routs than it would be possible
for him to accept; besides this, he had seen (as he called it) all the
remarkable sights at Rome. Yes, in a single day he had accomplished what
his more serious-minded companion would have taken weeks to effect.
Neither had he neglected to ascertain the name of the piece to be played
that night at the Teatro Argentina, and also what performers appeared in
it. The opera of Parisina was announced for representation, and the
principal actors were Coselli, Moriani, and La Specchia.

Albert had never been able to endure the Italian theatres, with their
orchestras from which it is impossible to see, and the absence of
balconies, or open boxes; all these defects pressed hard on a man who
had had his stall at the Bouffes, and had shared a lower box at the
Opera. Still, in spite of this, Albert displayed his most dazzling and
effective costumes each time he visited the theatres; but, alas, his
elegant toilet was wholly thrown away, and one of the most worthy
representatives of Parisian fashion had to carry with him the mortifying
reflection that he had nearly overrun Italy without meeting with a
single adventure.

Sometimes Albert would affect to make a joke of his want of success; but
internally he was deeply wounded, and his self-love immensely piqued, to
think that Albert de Morcerf, the most admired and most sought after of
any young person of his day, should thus be passed over, and merely have
his labor for his pains. And the thing was so much the more annoying,
as, according to the characteristic modesty of a Frenchman, Albert had
quitted Paris with the full conviction that he had only to show himself
in Italy to carry all before him, and that upon his return he should
astonish the Parisian world with the recital of his numerous love-
affairs.

Alas, poor Albert! None of those interesting adventures fell in his way;
the lovely Genoese, Florentines, and Neapolitans were all faithful, if
not to their husbands, at least to their lovers, and thought not of
changing even for the splendid appearance of Albert de Morcerf; and all
he gained was the painful conviction that the ladies of Italy have this
advantage over those of France, that they are faithful even in their
infidelity.

Albert, besides being an elegant, well-looking young man, was also
possessed of considerable talent and ability; moreover, he was a
viscount—a recently created one, certainly, but in the present day it is
not necessary to go as far back as Noah in tracing a descent, and a
genealogical tree is equally estimated, whether dated from 1399 or
merely 1815; but to crown all these advantages, Albert de Morcerf
commanded an income of 50,000 livres, a more than sufficient sum to
render him a personage of considerable importance in Paris. It was
therefore no small mortification to him to have visited most of the
principal cities in Italy without having excited the most trifling
observation.

Albert, however, hoped to indemnify himself for all these slights and
indifferences during the Carnival, knowing full well that among the
different states and kingdoms in which this festivity is celebrated,
Rome is the spot where even the wisest and gravest throw off the usual
rigidity of their lives, and deign to mingle in the follies of this time
of liberty and relaxation. The Carnival was to commence on the morrow;
therefore Albert had not an instant to lose in setting forth the
programme of his hopes, expectations, and claims to notice.

With this design he had engaged a box in the most conspicuous part of
the theatre, and exerted himself to set off his personal attractions by
the aid of the most rich and elaborate toilet. The box taken by Albert
was in the first circle; although each of the three tiers of boxes is
deemed equally aristocratic, and is, for this reason, generally styled
the “nobility’s boxes,” and although the box engaged for the two friends
was sufficiently capacious to contain at least a dozen persons, it had
cost less than would be paid at some of the French theatres for one
admitting merely four occupants.

Another motive had influenced Albert’s selection of his seat,—who knew
but that, thus advantageously placed, he might not in truth attract the
notice of some fair Roman, and an introduction might ensue that would
procure him the offer of a seat in a carriage, or a place in a princely
balcony, from which he might behold the gayeties of the Carnival?

These united considerations made Albert more lively and anxious to
please than he had hitherto been. Totally disregarding the business of
the stage, he leaned from his box and began attentively scrutinizing the
beauty of each pretty woman, aided by a powerful opera-glass; but, alas,
this attempt to attract notice wholly failed; not even curiosity had
been excited, and it was but too apparent that the lovely creatures,
into whose good graces he was desirous of stealing, were all so much
engrossed with themselves, their lovers, or their own thoughts, that
they had not so much as noticed him or the manipulation of his glass.

Towards the close of the first act, the door of a box which had been
hitherto vacant was opened; a lady entered to whom Franz had been
introduced in Paris, where indeed, he had imagined she still was. The
quick eye of Albert caught the involuntary start with which his friend
beheld the new arrival, and, turning to him, he said hastily:

“Ah, I know her by name!” exclaimed Albert; “she is said to possess as
much wit and cleverness as beauty. I was to have been presented to her
when I met her at Madame Villefort’s ball.”

At that instant, the countess perceived Franz, and graciously waved her
hand to him, to which he replied by a respectful inclination of the
head. “Upon my word,” said Albert, “you seem to be on excellent terms
with the beautiful countess.”

“Upon my word,” cried Albert, “you must have been a very entertaining
companion alone, or all but alone, with a beautiful woman in such a
place of sentiment as the Colosseum, and yet to find nothing better to
talk about than the dead! All I can say is, if ever I should get such a
chance, the living should be my theme.”

“But,” said Albert, breaking in upon his discourse, “never mind the
past; let us only remember the present. Are you not going to keep your
promise of introducing me to the fair subject of our remarks?”

“My good friend,” said Franz, turning to him, while Albert continued to
point his glass at every box in the theatre, “you seem determined not to
approve; you are really too difficult to please.”

Franz, who had mutely interrogated the countess, and received from her a
gracious smile in token that he would be welcome, sought not to retard
the gratification of Albert’s eager impatience, but began at once the
tour of the house, closely followed by Albert, who availed himself of
the few minutes required to reach the opposite side of the theatre to
settle the height and smoothness of his collar, and to arrange the
lappets of his coat. This important task was just completed as they
arrived at the countess’s box.

Franz presented Albert as one of the most distinguished young men of the
day, both as regarded his position in society and extraordinary talents;
nor did he say more than the truth, for in Paris and the circle in which
the viscount moved, he was looked upon and cited as a model of
perfection. Franz added that his companion, deeply grieved at having
been prevented the honor of being presented to the countess during her
sojourn in Paris, was most anxious to make up for it, and had requested
him (Franz) to remedy the past misfortune by conducting him to her box,
and concluded by asking pardon for his presumption in having taken it
upon himself to do so.

The countess, in reply, bowed gracefully to Albert, and extended her
hand with cordial kindness to Franz; then, inviting Albert to take the
vacant seat beside her, she recommended Franz to take the next best, if
he wished to view the ballet, and pointed to the one behind her own
chair.

Albert was soon deeply engrossed in discoursing upon Paris and Parisian
matters, speaking to the countess of the various persons they both knew
there. Franz perceived how completely he was in his element; and,
unwilling to interfere with the pleasure he so evidently felt, took up
Albert’s glass, and began in his turn to survey the audience.

Sitting alone, in the front of a box immediately opposite, but situated
on the third row, was a woman of exquisite beauty, dressed in a Greek
costume, which evidently, from the ease and grace with which she wore
it, was her national attire. Behind her, but in deep shadow, was the
outline of a masculine figure; but the features of this latter personage
it was not possible to distinguish. Franz could not forbear breaking in
upon the apparently interesting conversation passing between the
countess and Albert, to inquire of the former if she knew who was the
fair Albanian opposite, since beauty such as hers was well worthy of
being observed by either sex.

Franz and the countess exchanged a smile, and then the latter resumed
her conversation with Albert, while Franz returned to his previous
survey of the house and company. The curtain rose on the ballet, which
was one of those excellent specimens of the Italian school, admirably
arranged and put on the stage by Henri, who has established for himself
a great reputation throughout Italy for his taste and skill in the
choreographic art—one of those masterly productions of grace, method,
and elegance in which the whole corps de ballet, from the principal
dancers to the humblest supernumerary, are all engaged on the stage at
the same time; and a hundred and fifty persons may be seen exhibiting
the same attitude, or elevating the same arm or leg with a simultaneous
movement, that would lead you to suppose that but one mind, one act of
volition, influenced the moving mass.

Upon his return to the hotel, Franz found Albert in his dressing-gown
and slippers, listlessly extended on a sofa, smoking a cigar.

“My dear Albert,” replied Franz, “I am glad of this opportunity to tell
you, once and forever, that you entertain a most erroneous notion
concerning Italian women. I should have thought the continual failures
you have met with in all your own love affairs might have taught you
better by this time.”

Franz smiled; for he well remembered that Albert particularly prided
himself on the entire absence of color in his own complexion.

Franz looked at Albert as though he had not much confidence in the
suggestions of his imagination.

“I tell you what, M. Franz,” cried Albert, “you deserve to be called out
for such a misgiving and incredulous glance as that you were pleased to
bestow on me just now.”

“Well,” said Franz, “this time, M. Albert, I am bound to give you credit
for having hit upon a most capital idea.”

“And quite a national one, too,” replied Albert with gratified pride. “A
mere masque borrowed from our own festivities. Ha, ha, ye Romans! you
thought to make us, unhappy strangers, trot at the heels of your
processions, like so many lazzaroni, because no carriages or horses are
to be had in your beggarly city. But you don’t know us; when we can’t
have one thing we invent another.”

“Now, then,” asked Albert eagerly, “have you found the desired cart and
oxen?”

“Take care, my worthy host,” said Albert, “better is a sure enemy to
well.”

“I should think we did know it,” exclaimed Albert, “since it is owing to
that circumstance that we are packed into these small rooms, like two
poor students in the back streets of Paris.”

“But do you think,” asked Albert, “that we ought to accept such offers
from a perfect stranger?”

“It seems to me,” said Franz, speaking in an undertone to Albert, “that
if this person merited the high panegyrics of our landlord, he would
have conveyed his invitation through another channel, and not permitted
it to be brought to us in this unceremonious way. He would have
written—or——”

“Please to deliver these, from the Count of Monte Cristo to Vicomte
Albert de Morcerf and M. Franz d’Épinay. The Count of Monte Cristo,”
continued the servant, “begs these gentlemen’s permission to wait upon
them as their neighbor, and he will be honored by an intimation of what
time they will please to receive him.”

“Faith, Franz,” whispered Albert, “there is not much to find fault with
here.”

“That is what I call an elegant mode of attack,” said Albert, “You were
quite correct in what you said, Signor Pastrini. The Count of Monte
Cristo is unquestionably a man of first-rate breeding and knowledge of
the world.”

“Of course we do,” replied Albert. “Still, I must own I am sorry to be
obliged to give up the cart and the group of reapers—it would have
produced such an effect! And were it not for the windows at the Palazzo
Rospoli, by way of recompense for the loss of our beautiful scheme, I
don’t know but what I should have held on by my original plan. What say
you, Franz?”

Eight o’clock found Franz up and dressed, while Albert, who had not the
same motives for early rising, was still soundly asleep. The first act
of Franz was to summon his landlord, who presented himself with his
accustomed obsequiousness.

Time was getting on, however, and Franz deemed it advisable to awaken
Albert; but at the moment he prepared to proceed to his chamber, his
friend entered the room in perfect costume for the day. The anticipated
delights of the Carnival had so run in his head as to make him leave his
pillow long before his usual hour.

“Well, then, if it be so, are you ready, Albert?”

And with these words he disappeared behind one of the tapestried
portières. As the door opened, the sound of a guzla reached the ears of
the young men, but was almost immediately lost, for the rapid closing of
the door merely allowed one rich swell of harmony to enter. Franz and
Albert looked inquiringly at each other, then at the gorgeous
furnishings of the apartment. Everything seemed more magnificent at a
second view than it had done at their first rapid survey.

As Franz spoke, he heard the sound of a door turning on its hinges, and
almost immediately afterwards the tapestry was drawn aside, and the
owner of all these riches stood before the two young men. Albert
instantly rose to meet him, but Franz remained, in a manner, spellbound
on his chair; for in the person of him who had just entered he
recognized not only the mysterious visitant to the Colosseum, and the
occupant of the box at the Teatro Argentina, but also his extraordinary
host of Monte Cristo.

“Franz and I have to thank you a thousand times, count,” returned
Albert; “you extricated us from a great dilemma, and we were on the
point of inventing a very fantastic vehicle when your friendly
invitation reached us.”

“But, my dear count,” said Albert, “we shall abuse your kindness.”

“Then you disapprove of duelling? You would not fight a duel?” asked
Albert in his turn, astonished at this strange theory.

During the meal, which was excellent, and admirably served, Franz looked
repeatedly at Albert, in order to observe the impressions which he
doubted not had been made on him by the words of their entertainer; but
whether with his usual carelessness he had paid but little attention to
him, whether the explanation of the Count of Monte Cristo with regard to
duelling had satisfied him, or whether the events which Franz knew of
had had their effect on him alone, he remarked that his companion did
not pay the least regard to them, but on the contrary ate like a man who
for the last four or five months had been condemned to partake of
Italian cookery—that is, the worst in the world.

“You will describe it to me,” replied Franz, “and the recital from your
lips will make as great an impression on me as if I had witnessed it. I
have more than once intended witnessing an execution, but I have never
been able to make up my mind; and you, Albert?”

“Shall you go, then, Albert?” asked Franz.

The young men rose and returned into the salon, while the count, again
apologizing, left by another door. Albert, who was a great smoker, and
who had considered it no small sacrifice to be deprived of the cigars of
the Café de Paris, approached the table, and uttered a cry of joy at
perceiving some veritable puros.

“What do I think?” said Albert, evidently surprised at such a question
from his companion; “I think he is a delightful fellow, who does the
honors of his table admirably; who has travelled much, read much, is,
like Brutus, of the Stoic school, and moreover,” added he, sending a
volume of smoke up towards the ceiling, “that he has excellent cigars.”

Such was Albert’s opinion of the count, and as Franz well knew that
Albert professed never to form an opinion except upon long reflection,
he made no attempt to change it.

Albert reflected. “Ah,” replied he, sighing, “that is not very
surprising; I have been more than a year absent from Paris, and my
clothes are of a most antiquated cut; the count takes me for a
provincial. The first opportunity you have, undeceive him, I beg, and
tell him I am nothing of the kind.”

“With all my heart,” returned Albert; “Italian cigars are horrible. When
you come to Paris, I will return all this.”

Franz, Albert, and the count continued to descend the Corso. As they
approached the Piazza del Popolo, the crowd became more dense, and above
the heads of the multitude two objects were visible: the obelisk,
surmounted by a cross, which marks the centre of the square, and in
front of the obelisk, at the point where the three streets, del Babuino,
del Corso, and di Ripetta, meet, the two uprights of the scaffold,
between which glittered the curved knife of the mandaïa.

At this sight alone Franz felt his legs tremble under him. He looked at
Albert—he was as white as his shirt, and mechanically cast away his
cigar, although he had not half smoked it. The count alone seemed
unmoved—nay, more, a slight color seemed striving to rise in his pale
cheeks. His nostrils dilated like those of a wild beast that scents its
prey, and his lips, half opened, disclosed his white teeth, small and
sharp like those of a jackal. And yet his features wore an expression of
smiling tenderness, such as Franz had never before witnessed in them;
his black eyes especially were full of kindness and pity.

Albert, with his eyes closed, was standing grasping the window-curtains.

When Franz recovered his senses, he saw Albert drinking a glass of
water, of which, to judge from his pallor, he stood in great need; and
the count, who was assuming his masquerade costume. He glanced
mechanically towards the piazza—the scene was wholly changed; scaffold,
executioners, victims, all had disappeared; only the people remained,
full of noise and excitement. The bell of Monte Citorio, which only
sounds on the pope’s decease and the opening of the Carnival, was
ringing a joyous peal.

Albert was drawing on the satin pantaloon over his black trousers and
varnished boots.

“Well, Albert,” said Franz, “do you feel much inclined to join the
revels? Come, answer frankly.”

“Ma foi, no,” returned Albert. “But I am really glad to have seen such a
sight; and I understand what the count said—that when you have once
habituated yourself to a similar spectacle, it is the only one that
causes you any emotion.”

Franz and Albert were like men who, to drive away a violent sorrow, have
recourse to wine, and who, as they drink and become intoxicated, feel a
thick veil drawn between the past and the present. They saw, or rather
continued to see, the image of what they had witnessed; but little by
little the general vertigo seized them, and they felt themselves obliged
to take part in the noise and confusion.

Franz thanked the count for his attention. As for Albert, he was busily
occupied throwing bouquets at a carriage full of Roman peasants that was
passing near him. Unfortunately for him, the line of carriages moved on
again, and while he descended the Piazza del Popolo, the other ascended
towards the Palazzo di Venezia.

“How unfortunate that you were masked, Albert,” said Franz; “here was an
opportunity of making up for past disappointments.”

But, in spite of Albert’s hope, the day passed unmarked by any incident,
excepting two or three encounters with the carriage full of Roman
peasants. At one of these encounters, accidentally or purposely,
Albert’s mask fell off. He instantly rose and cast the remainder of the
bouquets into the carriage. Doubtless one of the charming females Albert
had detected beneath their coquettish disguise was touched by his
gallantry; for, as the carriage of the two friends passed her, she threw
a bunch of violets. Albert seized it, and as Franz had no reason to
suppose it was meant for him, he suffered Albert to retain it. Albert
placed it in his button-hole, and the carriage went triumphantly on.

The jest, however, soon appeared to become earnest; for when Albert and
Franz again encountered the carriage with the contadini, the one who had
thrown the violets to Albert, clapped her hands when she beheld them in
his button-hole.

Albert was right; the fair unknown had resolved, doubtless, to carry the
intrigue no farther; for although the young men made several more turns,
they did not again see the calash, which had turned up one of the
neighboring streets. Then they returned to the Rospoli Palace; but the
count and the blue domino had also disappeared; the two windows, hung
with yellow damask, were still occupied by the persons whom the count
had invited.

At this moment the same bell that had proclaimed the beginning of the
mascherata sounded the retreat. The file on the Corso broke the line,
and in a second all the carriages had disappeared. Franz and Albert were
opposite the Via delle Muratte; the coachman, without saying a word,
drove up it, passed along the Piazza di Spagna and the Rospoli Palace
and stopped at the door of the hotel. Signor Pastrini came to the door
to receive his guests.

The count had, moreover, charged him to offer the two friends the key of
his box at the Argentina. Franz questioned Albert as to his intentions;
but Albert had great projects to put into execution before going to the
theatre; and instead of making any answer, he inquired if Signor
Pastrini could procure him a tailor.

“To make us between now and tomorrow two Roman peasant costumes,”
returned Albert.

“My dear Albert,” said Franz, “leave all to our host; he has already
proved himself full of resources; let us dine quietly, and afterwards go
and see l’Italienne à Alger!

“Agreed,” returned Albert; “but remember, Signor Pastrini, that both my
friend and myself attach the greatest importance to having tomorrow the
costumes we have asked for.”

The host again assured them they might rely on him, and that their
wishes should be attended to; upon which Franz and Albert mounted to
their apartments, and proceeded to disencumber themselves of their
costumes. Albert, as he took off his dress, carefully preserved the
bunch of violets; it was his token reserved for the morrow.

The two friends sat down to table; but they could not refrain from
remarking the difference between the Count of Monte Cristo’s table and
that of Signor Pastrini. Truth compelled Franz, in spite of the dislike
he seemed to have taken to the count, to confess that the advantage was
not on Pastrini’s side. During dessert, the servant inquired at what
time they wished for the carriage. Albert and Franz looked at each
other, fearing really to abuse the count’s kindness. The servant
understood them.

This precaution taken, they went to the theatre, and installed
themselves in the count’s box. During the first act, the Countess G——
entered. Her first look was at the box where she had seen the count the
previous evening, so that she perceived Franz and Albert in the place of
the very person concerning whom she had expressed so strange an opinion
to Franz. Her opera-glass was so fixedly directed towards them, that
Franz saw it would be cruel not to satisfy her curiosity; and, availing
himself of one of the privileges of the spectators of the Italian
theatres, who use their boxes to hold receptions, the two friends went
to pay their respects to the countess. Scarcely had they entered, when
she motioned to Franz to assume the seat of honor. Albert, in his turn,
sat behind.

“We should be very hard to please, madam,” returned Albert, “did we not
think him delightful. A friend of ten years’ standing could not have
done more for us, or with a more perfect courtesy.”

“When you say invisible,” interrupted Albert, “it is only to keep up the
mystery; for whom do you take the blue domino at the window with the
white curtains?”

“In reality,” observed Albert, “he seemed to me somewhat eccentric; were
he at Paris, and a frequenter of the theatres, I should say he was a
poor devil literally mad. This morning he made two or three exits worthy
of Didier or Anthony.”

Albert was impatient to see how he looked in his new dress—a jacket and
breeches of blue velvet, silk stockings with clocks, shoes with buckles,
and a silk waistcoat. This picturesque attire set him off to great
advantage; and when he had bound the scarf around his waist, and when
his hat, placed coquettishly on one side, let fall on his shoulder a
stream of ribbons, Franz was forced to confess that costume has much to
do with the physical superiority we accord to certain nations. The Turks
used to be so picturesque with their long and flowing robes, but are
they not now hideous with their blue frocks buttoned up to the chin, and
their red caps, which make them look like a bottle of wine with a red
seal? Franz complimented Albert, who looked at himself in the glass with
an unequivocal smile of satisfaction. They were thus engaged when the
Count of Monte Cristo entered.

The young men wished to decline, but they could find no good reason for
refusing an offer which was so agreeable to them. The Count of Monte
Cristo remained a quarter of an hour with them, conversing on all
subjects with the greatest ease. He was, as we have already said,
perfectly well acquainted with the literature of all countries. A glance
at the walls of his salon proved to Franz and Albert that he was a
connoisseur of pictures. A few words he let fall showed them that he was
no stranger to the sciences, and he seemed much occupied with chemistry.
The two friends did not venture to return the count the breakfast he had
given them; it would have been too absurd to offer him in exchange for
his excellent table the very inferior one of Signor Pastrini. They told
him so frankly, and he received their excuses with the air of a man who
appreciated their delicacy. Albert was charmed with the count’s manners,
and he was only prevented from recognizing him for a perfect gentleman
by reason of his varied knowledge.

The permission to do what he liked with the carriage pleased him above
all, for the fair peasants had appeared in a most elegant carriage the
preceding evening, and Albert was not sorry to be upon an equal footing
with them. At half-past one they descended, the coachman and footman had
put on their livery over their disguises, which gave them a more
ridiculous appearance than ever, and which gained them the applause of
Franz and Albert. Albert had fastened the faded bunch of violets to his
button-hole. At the first sound of the bell they hastened into the Corso
by the Via Vittoria.

At the second turn, a bunch of fresh violets, thrown from a carriage
filled with harlequins, indicated to Albert that, like himself and his
friend, the peasants had changed their costume also; and whether it was
the result of chance, or whether a similar feeling had possessed them
both, while he had donned their costume, they had assumed his.

Albert placed the fresh bouquet in his button-hole, but he kept the
faded one in his hand; and when he again met the calash, he raised it to
his lips, an action which seemed greatly to amuse not only the fair lady
who had thrown it, but her joyous companions also. The day was as gay as
the preceding one, perhaps even more animated and noisy; the count
appeared for an instant at his window, but when they again passed he had
disappeared. It is almost needless to say that the flirtation between
Albert and the fair peasant continued all day.

At ten minutes past five Albert entered overjoyed. The harlequin had
reassumed her peasant’s costume, and as she passed she raised her mask.
She was charming. Franz congratulated Albert, who received his
congratulations with the air of a man conscious that they are merited.
He had recognized by certain unmistakable signs, that his fair incognita
belonged to the aristocracy. He had made up his mind to write to her the
next day.

Franz remarked, while he gave these details, that Albert seemed to have
something to ask of him, but that he was unwilling to ask it. He
insisted upon it, declaring beforehand that he was willing to make any
sacrifice the other wished.

Albert let himself be pressed just as long as friendship required, and
then avowed to Franz that he would do him a great favor by allowing him
to occupy the carriage alone the next day. Albert attributed to Franz’s
absence the extreme kindness of the fair peasant in raising her mask.
Franz was not sufficiently egotistical to stop Albert in the middle of
an adventure that promised to prove so agreeable to his curiosity and so
flattering to his vanity. He felt assured that the perfect indiscretion
of his friend would duly inform him of all that happened; and as, during
three years that he had travelled all over Italy, a similar piece of
good fortune had never fallen to his share, Franz was by no means sorry
to learn how to act on such an occasion. He therefore promised Albert
that he would content himself the morrow with witnessing the Carnival
from the windows of the Rospoli Palace.

The next morning he saw Albert pass and repass, holding an enormous
bouquet, which he doubtless meant to make the bearer of his amorous
epistle. This belief was changed into certainty when Franz saw the
bouquet (conspicuous by a circle of white camellias) in the hand of a
charming harlequin dressed in rose-colored satin.

The evening was no longer joy, but delirium. Albert nothing doubted but
that the fair unknown would reply in the same manner. Franz anticipated
his wishes by saying that the noise fatigued him, and that he should
pass the next day in writing and looking over his journal. Albert was
not deceived, for the next evening Franz saw him enter triumphantly
shaking a folded paper which he held by one corner.

“I think so, also,” replied Albert; “and I very much fear you will go
alone to the Duke of Bracciano’s ball.”

Franz and Albert had received that morning an invitation from the
celebrated Roman banker.

“Take care, Albert,” said Franz. “All the nobility of Rome will be
present, and if your fair incognita belong to the higher class of
society, she must go there.”

“Whether she goes there or not, my opinion is still the same,” returned
Albert. “You have read the letter?”

“Laugh as much as you will,” replied Albert, “I am in love.”

“If my unknown be as amiable as she is beautiful,” said Albert, “I shall
fix myself at Rome for six weeks, at least. I adore Rome, and I have
always had a great taste for archæology.”

Doubtless Albert was about to discuss seriously his right to the
academic chair when they were informed that dinner was ready. Albert’s
love had not taken away his appetite. He hastened with Franz to seat
himself, free to recommence the discussion after dinner. After dinner,
the Count of Monte Cristo was announced. They had not seen him for two
days. Signor Pastrini informed them that business had called him to
Civita Vecchia. He had started the previous evening, and had only
returned an hour since. He was charming. Whether he kept a watch over
himself, or whether by accident he did not sound the acrimonious chords
that in other circumstances had been touched, he was tonight like
everybody else.

The count had learned that the two friends had sent to secure a box at
the Argentina Theatre, and were told they were all let. In consequence,
he brought them the key of his own—at least such was the apparent motive
of his visit. Franz and Albert made some difficulty, alleging their fear
of depriving him of it; but the count replied that, as he was going to
the Palli Theatre, the box at the Argentina Theatre would be lost if
they did not profit by it. This assurance determined the two friends to
accept it.

The count was no longer young. He was at least forty; and yet it was
easy to understand that he was formed to rule the young men with whom he
associated at present. And, to complete his resemblance with the
fantastic heroes of the English poet, the count seemed to have the power
of fascination. Albert was constantly expatiating on their good fortune
in meeting such a man. Franz was less enthusiastic; but the count
exercised over him also the ascendency a strong mind always acquires
over a mind less domineering. He thought several times of the project
the count had of visiting Paris; and he had no doubt but that, with his
eccentric character, his characteristic face, and his colossal fortune,
he would produce a great effect there. And yet he did not wish to be at
Paris when the count was there.

The evening passed as evenings mostly pass at Italian theatres; that is,
not in listening to the music, but in paying visits and conversing. The
Countess G—— wished to revive the subject of the count, but Franz
announced he had something far newer to tell her, and, in spite of
Albert’s demonstrations of false modesty, he informed the countess of
the great event which had preoccupied them for the last three days. As
similar intrigues are not uncommon in Italy, if we may credit
travellers, the comtess did not manifest the least incredulity, but
congratulated Albert on his success. They promised, upon separating, to
meet at the Duke of Bracciano’s ball, to which all Rome was invited.

The heroine of the bouquet kept her word; she gave Albert no sign of her
existence the morrow or the day after.

At length Tuesday came, the last and most tumultuous day of the
Carnival. On Tuesday, the theatres open at ten o’clock in the morning,
as Lent begins after eight at night. On Tuesday, all those who through
want of money, time, or enthusiasm, have not been to see the Carnival
before, mingle in the gayety, and contribute to the noise and
excitement. From two o’clock till five Franz and Albert followed in the
fête, exchanging handfuls of confetti with the other carriages and the
pedestrians, who crowded amongst the horses’ feet and the carriage
wheels without a single accident, a single dispute, or a single fight.

The fêtes are veritable pleasure days to the Italians. The author of
this history, who has resided five or six years in Italy, does not
recollect to have ever seen a ceremony interrupted by one of those
events so common in other countries. Albert was triumphant in his
harlequin costume. A knot of rose-colored ribbons fell from his shoulder
almost to the ground. In order that there might be no confusion, Franz
wore his peasant’s costume.

A new source of noise and movement was added to the crowd. The sellers
of moccoletti entered on the scene. The moccoli, or moccoletti, are
candles which vary in size from the pascal taper to the rushlight, and
which give to each actor in the great final scene of the Carnival two
very serious problems to grapple with,—first, how to keep his own
moccoletto alight; and secondly, how to extinguish the moccoletti of
others. The moccoletto is like life: man has found but one means of
transmitting it, and that one comes from God. But he has discovered a
thousand means of taking it away, and the devil has somewhat aided him.
The moccoletto is kindled by approaching it to a light. But who can
describe the thousand means of extinguishing the moccoletto?—the
gigantic bellows, the monstrous extinguishers, the superhuman fans.
Everyone hastened to purchase moccoletti—Franz and Albert among the
rest.

Every five minutes Albert took out his watch; at length it pointed to
seven. The two friends were in the Via dei Pontefici. Albert sprang out,
bearing his moccoletto in his hand. Two or three masks strove to knock
his moccoletto out of his hand; but Albert, a first-rate pugilist, sent
them rolling in the street, one after the other, and continued his
course towards the church of San Giacomo.

The steps were crowded with masks, who strove to snatch each other’s
torches. Franz followed Albert with his eyes, and saw him mount the
first step.

Instantly a mask, wearing the well-known costume of a peasant woman,
snatched his moccoletto from him without his offering any resistance.
Franz was too far off to hear what they said; but, without doubt,
nothing hostile passed, for he saw Albert disappear arm-in-arm with the
peasant girl. He watched them pass through the crowd for some time, but
at length he lost sight of them in the Via Macello.

Dinner was waiting, but as Albert had told him that he should not return
so soon, Franz sat down without him. Signor Pastrini, who had been
accustomed to see them dine together, inquired into the cause of his
absence, but Franz merely replied that Albert had received on the
previous evening an invitation which he had accepted.

Franz resolved to wait for Albert as late as possible. He ordered the
carriage, therefore, for eleven o’clock, desiring Signor Pastrini to
inform him the moment that Albert returned to the hotel.

At eleven o’clock Albert had not come back. Franz dressed himself, and
went out, telling his host that he was going to pass the night at the
Duke of Bracciano’s. The house of the Duke of Bracciano is one of the
most delightful in Rome, the duchess, one of the last heiresses of the
Colonnas, does its honors with the most consummate grace, and thus their
fêtes have a European celebrity.

Franz and Albert had brought to Rome letters of introduction to them,
and their first question on his arrival was to inquire the whereabouts
of his travelling companion. Franz replied that he had left him at the
moment they were about to extinguish the moccoli, and that he had lost
sight of him in the Via Macello.

“Our friend, Albert de Morcerf, countess, whom I left in pursuit of his
unknown about seven o’clock this evening,” said Franz, “and whom I have
not seen since.”

As he came near the hotel, Franz saw a man in the middle of the street.
He had no doubt that it was the messenger from Albert. The man was
wrapped up in a large cloak. He went up to him, but, to his extreme
astonishment, the stranger first addressed him.

The innkeeper gave orders to a servant to go before Franz with a light.
The young man had found Signor Pastrini looking very much alarmed, and
this had only made him the more anxious to read Albert’s letter; and so
he went instantly towards the waxlight, and unfolded it. It was written
and signed by Albert. Franz read it twice before he could comprehend
what it contained. It was thus worded:

“Albert de Morcerf.

“Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mille piastre non sono nelle mie
mani, alla sette il Conte Alberto avrà cessato di vivere.

“If by six in the morning the four thousand piastres are not in my
hands, by seven o’clock the Count Albert will have ceased to live.”

This second signature explained everything to Franz, who now understood
the objection of the messenger to coming up into the apartment; the
street was safer for him. Albert, then, had fallen into the hands of the
famous bandit chief, in whose existence he had for so long a time
refused to believe.

There was no time to lose. He hastened to open the secrétaire, and found
the pocket-book in the drawer, and in it the letter of credit. There
were in all six thousand piastres, but of these six thousand Albert had
already expended three thousand.

As to Franz, he had no letter of credit, as he lived at Florence, and
had only come to Rome to pass seven or eight days; he had brought but a
hundred louis, and of these he had not more than fifty left. Thus seven
or eight hundred piastres were wanting to them both to make up the sum
that Albert required. True, he might in such a case rely on the kindness
of Signor Torlonia. He was, therefore, about to return to the Palazzo
Bracciano without loss of time, when suddenly a luminous idea crossed
his mind.

“Yes,” replied the count, going to the door, and returning. Franz gave
him Albert’s letter.

“‘Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mille piastre non sono nelle mie
mani, alla sette il conte Alberto avrà cessato di vivere.

“If we were to go together to Luigi Vampa, I am sure he would not refuse
you Albert’s freedom.”

“How did the Viscount Albert fall into Luigi’s hands?”

“Why, that I should think it very amusing,” replied Franz, “if it had
happened to anyone but poor Albert.”

“You have this evening carried off and conveyed hither the Viscount
Albert de Morcerf. Well,” continued the count, in a tone that made Franz
shudder, “this young gentleman is one of my friends—this young gentleman
lodges in the same hotel as myself—this young gentleman has been up and
down the Corso for eight hours in my private carriage, and yet, I repeat
to you, you have carried him off, and conveyed him hither, and,” added
the count, taking the letter from his pocket, “you have set a ransom on
him, as if he were an utter stranger.”

The chief went towards the place he had pointed out as Albert’s prison,
and Franz and the count followed him.

“Come in, your excellency,” said Vampa. The count and Franz ascended
seven or eight steps after the chief, who drew back a bolt and opened a
door. Then, by the gleam of a lamp, similar to that which lighted the
columbarium, Albert was to be seen wrapped up in a cloak which one of
the bandits had lent him, lying in a corner in profound slumber.

Vampa looked at Albert with a kind of admiration; he was not insensible
to such a proof of courage.

Then going to Albert, he touched him on the shoulder, saying, “Will your
excellency please to awaken?”

Albert stretched out his arms, rubbed his eyelids, and opened his eyes.

“My dear fellow,” replied Albert, with perfect ease of mind, “remember,
for the future, Napoleon’s maxim, ‘Never awaken me but for bad news;’ if
you had let me sleep on, I should have finished my galop, and have been
grateful to you all my life. So, then, they have paid my ransom?”

Albert looked around and perceived Franz. “What,” said he, “is it you,
my dear Franz, whose devotion and friendship are thus displayed?”

“Oh, my dear count,” said Albert gayly, arranging his cravat and
wristbands, “you are really most kind, and I hope you will consider me
as under eternal obligations to you, in the first place for the
carriage, and in the next for this visit,” and he put out his hand to
the count, who shuddered as he gave his own, but who nevertheless did
give it.

The bandit gazed on this scene with amazement; he was evidently
accustomed to see his prisoners tremble before him, and yet here was one
whose gay temperament was not for a moment altered; as for Franz, he was
enchanted at the way in which Albert had sustained the national honor in
the presence of the bandit.

“My dear Albert,” he said, “if you will make haste, we shall yet have
time to finish the night at Torlonia’s. You may conclude your
interrupted galop, so that you will owe no ill-will to Signor Luigi, who
has, indeed, throughout this whole affair acted like a gentleman.”

“You are decidedly right, and we may reach the Palazzo by two o’clock.
Signor Luigi,” continued Albert, “is there any formality to fulfil
before I take leave of your excellency?”

And Albert, followed by Franz and the count, descended the staircase,
crossed the square chamber, where stood all the bandits, hat in hand.

Franz and Albert bowed. The count went out first, then Albert. Franz
paused for a moment.

“Well, are you coming?” asked Albert.

“Ah, your pardon,” said Albert, turning round; “will you allow me,
captain?”

It was just two o’clock by Albert’s watch when the two friends entered
into the dancing-room. Their return was quite an event, but as they
entered together, all uneasiness on Albert’s account ceased instantly.

And as at this moment the orchestra gave the signal for the waltz,
Albert put his arm round the waist of the countess, and disappeared with
her in the whirl of dancers.

In the meanwhile Franz was considering the singular shudder that had
passed over the Count of Monte Cristo at the moment when he had been, in
some sort, forced to give his hand to Albert.

The first words that Albert uttered to his friend, on the following
morning, contained a request that Franz would accompany him on a visit
to the count; true, the young man had warmly and energetically thanked
the count on the previous evening; but services such as he had rendered
could never be too often acknowledged. Franz, who seemed attracted by
some invisible influence towards the count, in which terror was
strangely mingled, felt an extreme reluctance to permit his friend to be
exposed alone to the singular fascination that this mysterious personage
seemed to exercise over him, and therefore made no objection to Albert’s
request, but at once accompanied him to the desired spot, and, after a
short delay, the count joined them in the salon.

“My dear count,” said Albert, advancing to meet him, “permit me to
repeat the poor thanks I offered last night, and to assure you that the
remembrance of all I owe to you will never be effaced from my memory;
believe me, as long as I live, I shall never cease to dwell with
grateful recollection on the prompt and important service you rendered
me; and also to remember that to you I am indebted even for my life.”

“Upon my word,” said Albert, “I deserve no credit for what I could not
help, namely, a determination to take everything as I found it, and to
let those bandits see, that although men get into troublesome scrapes
all over the world, there is no nation but the French that can smile
even in the face of grim Death himself. All that, however, has nothing
to do with my obligations to you, and I now come to ask you whether, in
my own person, my family, or connections, I can in any way serve you? My
father, the Comte de Morcerf, although of Spanish origin, possesses
considerable influence, both at the court of France and Madrid, and I
unhesitatingly place the best services of myself, and all to whom my
life is dear, at your disposal.”

“Is it possible,” exclaimed Albert, “that you have reached your present
age without visiting the finest capital in the world? I can scarcely
credit it.”

“So distinguished an individual as yourself,” cried Albert, “could
scarcely have required an introduction.”

“Oh, that I do, and with infinite pleasure,” answered Albert; “and so
much the more readily as a letter received this morning from my father
summons me to Paris, in consequence of a treaty of marriage (my dear
Franz, do not smile, I beg of you) with a family of high standing, and
connected with the very cream of Parisian society.”

“Well, never mind how it is,” answered Albert, “it comes to the same
thing in the end. Perhaps by the time you return to Paris, I shall be
quite a sober, staid father of a family! A most edifying representative
I shall make of all the domestic virtues—don’t you think so? But as
regards your wish to visit our fine city, my dear count, I can only say
that you may command me and mine to any extent you please.”

“But tell me now, count,” exclaimed Albert, delighted at the idea of
having to chaperon so distinguished a person as Monte Cristo; “tell me
truly whether you are in earnest, or if this project of visiting Paris
is merely one of the chimerical and uncertain air castles of which we
make so many in the course of our lives, but which, like a house built
on the sand, is liable to be blown over by the first puff of wind?”

“And in three months’ time,” said Albert, “you will be at my house?”

“Day for day, hour for hour,” said Albert; “that will suit me to a dot.”

“Capital!” exclaimed Albert; “your breakfast shall be waiting.”

“Shall I see you again ere my departure?” asked Albert.

“Let us understand each other,” said Albert; “it is agreed—is it
not?—that you are to be at No. 27, in the Rue du Helder, on the 21st of
May, at half-past ten in the morning, and your word of honor passed for
your punctuality?”

“What is the matter?” asked Albert of Franz, when they had returned to
their own apartments; “you seem more than commonly thoughtful.”

“I will confess to you, Albert,” replied Franz, “the count is a very
singular person, and the appointment you have made to meet him in Paris
fills me with a thousand apprehensions.”

“My dear fellow,” exclaimed Albert, “what can there possibly be in that
to excite uneasiness? Why, you must have lost your senses.”

“Listen to me, Franz,” said Albert; “I am glad that the occasion has
presented itself for saying this to you, for I have noticed how cold you
are in your bearing towards the count, while he, on the other hand, has
always been courtesy itself to us. Have you anything particular against
him?”

At last he arrived at the adventure of the preceding night, and the
embarrassment in which he found himself placed by not having sufficient
cash by six or seven hundred piastres to make up the sum required, and
finally of his application to the count and the picturesque and
satisfactory result that followed. Albert listened with the most
profound attention.

“My good friend, as in all probability I own my present safety to that
influence, it would ill become me to search too closely into its source;
therefore, instead of condemning him for his intimacy with outlaws, you
must give me leave to excuse any little irregularity there may be in
such a connection; not altogether for preserving my life, for my own
idea was that it never was in much danger, but certainly for saving me
4,000 piastres, which, being translated, means neither more nor less
than 24,000 livres of our money—a sum at which, most assuredly, I should
never have been estimated in France, proving most indisputably,” added
Albert with a laugh, “that no prophet is honored in his own country.”

“My dear Franz,” replied Albert, “when, upon receipt of my letter, you
found the necessity of asking the count’s assistance, you promptly went
to him, saying, ‘My friend Albert de Morcerf is in danger; help me to
deliver him.’ Was not that nearly what you said?”

“Well, then, did he ask you, ‘Who is M. Albert de Morcerf? how does he
come by his name—his fortune? what are his means of existence? what is
his birthplace? of what country is he a native?’ Tell me, did he put all
these questions to you?”

And this time it must be confessed that, contrary to the usual state of
affairs in discussions between the young men, the effective arguments
were all on Albert’s side.

Franz silently assented; and the following afternoon, at half-past five
o’clock, the young men parted. Albert de Morcerf to return to Paris, and
Franz d’Épinay to pass a fortnight at Venice.

But, ere he entered his travelling carriage, Albert, fearing that his
expected guest might forget the engagement he had entered into, placed
in the care of a waiter at the hotel a card to be delivered to the Count
of Monte Cristo, on which, beneath the name of Viscount Albert de
Morcerf, he had written in pencil:

In the house in the Rue du Helder, where Albert had invited the Count of
Monte Cristo, everything was being prepared on the morning of the 21st
of May to do honor to the occasion. Albert de Morcerf inhabited a
pavilion situated at the corner of a large court, and directly opposite
another building, in which were the servants’ apartments. Two windows
only of the pavilion faced the street; three other windows looked into
the court, and two at the back into the garden.

It was easy to discover that the delicate care of a mother, unwilling to
part from her son, and yet aware that a young man of the viscount’s age
required the full exercise of his liberty, had chosen this habitation
for Albert. There were not lacking, however, evidences of what we may
call the intelligent egoism of a youth who is charmed with the indolent,
careless life of an only son, and who lives as it were in a gilded cage.
By means of the two windows looking into the street, Albert could see
all that passed; the sight of what is going on is necessary to young
men, who always want to see the world traverse their horizon, even if
that horizon is only a public thoroughfare. Then, should anything appear
to merit a more minute examination, Albert de Morcerf could follow up
his researches by means of a small gate, similar to that close to the
concierge’s door, and which merits a particular description.

At the end of a long corridor, with which the door communicated, and
which formed the antechamber, was, on the right, Albert’s breakfast-
room, looking into the court, and on the left the salon, looking into
the garden. Shrubs and creeping plants covered the windows, and hid from
the garden and court these two apartments, the only rooms into which, as
they were on the ground floor, the prying eyes of the curious could
penetrate.

There were collected and piled up all Albert’s successive caprices,
hunting-horns, bass-viols, flutes—a whole orchestra, for Albert had had
not a taste but a fancy for music; easels, palettes, brushes,
pencils—for music had been succeeded by painting; foils, boxing-gloves,
broadswords, and single-sticks—for, following the example of the
fashionable young men of the time, Albert de Morcerf cultivated, with
far more perseverance than music and drawing, the three arts that
complete a dandy’s education, i.e., fencing, boxing, and single-stick;
and it was here that he received Grisier, Cooks, and Charles Leboucher.

On the walls, over the doors, on the ceiling, were swords, daggers,
Malay creeses, maces, battle-axes; gilded, damasked, and inlaid suits of
armor; dried plants, minerals, and stuffed birds, their flame-colored
wings outspread in motionless flight, and their beaks forever open. This
was Albert’s favorite lounging place.

Albert had himself presided at the arrangement, or, rather, the
symmetrical derangement, which, after coffee, the guests at a breakfast
of modern days love to contemplate through the vapor that escapes from
their mouths, and ascends in long and fanciful wreaths to the ceiling.

At a quarter to ten, a valet entered; he composed, with a little groom
named John, and who only spoke English, all Albert’s establishment,
although the cook of the hotel was always at his service, and on great
occasions the count’s chasseur also. This valet, whose name was Germain,
and who enjoyed the entire confidence of his young master, held in one
hand a number of papers, and in the other a packet of letters, which he
gave to Albert. Albert glanced carelessly at the different missives,
selected two written in a small and delicate hand, and enclosed in
scented envelopes, opened them and perused their contents with some
attention.

“Very well, at half past ten. Debray will, perhaps, be obliged to go to
the minister—and besides” (Albert looked at his tablets), “it is the
hour I told the count, 21st May, at half past ten; and though I do not
much rely upon his promise, I wish to be punctual. Is the countess up
yet?”

The valet left the room. Albert threw himself on the divan, tore off the
cover of two or three of the papers, looked at the theatre
announcements, made a face seeing they gave an opera, and not a ballet;
hunted vainly amongst the advertisements for a new tooth-powder of which
he had heard, and threw down, one after the other, the three leading
papers of Paris, muttering,

“Good-morning, Lucien, good-morning,” said Albert; “your punctuality
really alarms me. What do I say? punctuality! You, whom I expected last,
you arrive at five minutes to ten, when the time fixed was half-past!
Has the ministry resigned?”

“It is my duty as your host,” returned Albert, ringing the bell, while
Lucien turned over, with his gold-mounted cane, the papers that lay on
the table. “Germain, a glass of sherry and a biscuit. In the meantime,
my dear Lucien, here are cigars—contraband, of course—try them, and
persuade the minister to sell us such instead of poisoning us with
cabbage leaves.”

“On my word,” said Albert, “you astonish me by the extent of your
knowledge. Take a cigar.”

“Really, my dear Albert,” replied Lucien, lighting a manilla at a rose-
colored taper that burnt in a beautifully enamelled stand—“how happy you
are to have nothing to do. You do not know your own good fortune!”

“I think, Albert, you have adopted the system of feeding me on smoke
this morning.”

“M. Beauchamp,” announced the servant. “Come in, come in,” said Albert,
rising and advancing to meet the young man. “Here is Debray, who detests
you without reading you, so he says.”

“I only await one thing before following your advice; that is, a
minister who will hold office for six months. My dear Albert, one word,
for I must give poor Lucien a respite. Do we breakfast or dine? I must
go to the Chamber, for our life is not an idle one.”

“My dear friend,” said Albert to Beauchamp, “it is plain that the
affairs of Spain are settled, for you are most desperately out of humor
this morning. Recollect that Parisian gossip has spoken of a marriage
between myself and Mlle. Eugénie Danglars; I cannot in conscience,
therefore, let you run down the speeches of a man who will one day say
to me, ‘Vicomte, you know I give my daughter two millions.’”

“On my word, I think you are right, Lucien,” said Albert absently.

“Now, then, to breakfast,” said Beauchamp; “for, if I remember, you told
me you only expected two persons, Albert.”

“Morrel,” muttered Albert—“Morrel—who is he?”

But before he had finished, M. de Château-Renaud, a handsome young man
of thirty, gentleman all over,—that is, with the figure of a Guiche and
the wit of a Mortemart,—took Albert’s hand.

“My dear Albert,” said he, “let me introduce to you M. Maximilian
Morrel, captain of Spahis, my friend; and what is more—however the man
speaks for himself—my preserver. Salute my hero, viscount.”

“Monsieur,” said Albert with affectionate courtesy, “the count of
Château-Renaud knew how much pleasure this introduction would give me;
you are his friend, be ours also.”

“What has he done?” asked Albert.

“It is a road your ancestors have traced for you,” said Albert
gallantly.

“The history to which M. Morrel alludes,” continued Château-Renaud, “is
an admirable one, which he will tell you some day when you are better
acquainted with him; today let us fill our stomachs, and not our
memories. What time do you breakfast, Albert?”

“Really,” said Albert, “I do not know; when I invited him three months
ago, he was then at Rome, but since that time who knows where he may
have gone?”

“Come, my dear Albert,” said Debray, “confess that your cook is
behindhand, that the oysters have not arrived from Ostend or Marennes,
and that, like Madame de Maintenon, you are going to replace the dish by
a story. Say so at once; we are sufficiently well-bred to excuse you,
and to listen to your history, fabulous as it promises to be.”

“But Franz did come with the four thousand crowns,” said Château-Renaud.
“A man whose name is Franz d’Épinay or Albert de Morcerf has not much
difficulty in procuring them.”

“Precisely!” cried Albert. “Well, he of whom I speak is the lord and
master of this grain of sand, of this atom; he has purchased the title
of count somewhere in Tuscany.”

“Ah,” cried Albert, “it is very lucky that M. Morrel comes to aid me;
you are vexed, are you not, that he thus gives a clew to the labyrinth?”

“My dear Albert,” said Debray, “what you tell us is so extraordinary.”

“Now you get angry, and attack our poor agents. How will you have them
protect you? The Chamber cuts down their salaries every day, so that now
they have scarcely any. Will you be ambassador, Albert? I will send you
to Constantinople.”

“Yes,” said Albert, “but this has nothing to do with the existence of
the Count of Monte Cristo.”

“No Count of Monte Cristo” added Debray. “There is half-past ten
striking, Albert.”

But the sound of the clock had not died away when Germain announced,
“His excellency the Count of Monte Cristo.” The involuntary start
everyone gave proved how much Morcerf’s narrative had impressed them,
and Albert himself could not wholly refrain from manifesting sudden
emotion. He had not heard a carriage stop in the street, or steps in the
antechamber; the door had itself opened noiselessly. The count appeared,
dressed with the greatest simplicity, but the most fastidious dandy
could have found nothing to cavil at in his toilet. Every article of
dress—hat, coat, gloves, and boots—was from the first makers. He seemed
scarcely five-and-thirty. But what struck everybody was his extreme
resemblance to the portrait Debray had drawn. The count advanced,
smiling, into the centre of the room, and approached Albert, who
hastened towards him holding out his hand in a ceremonial manner.

“My dear count,” replied Albert, “I was announcing your visit to some of
my friends, whom I had invited in consequence of the promise you did me
the honor to make, and whom I now present to you. They are the Count of
Château-Renaud, whose nobility goes back to the twelve peers, and whose
ancestors had a place at the Round Table; M. Lucien Debray, private
secretary to the minister of the interior; M. Beauchamp, an editor of a
paper, and the terror of the French government, but of whom, in spite of
his national celebrity, you perhaps have not heard in Italy, since his
paper is prohibited there; and M. Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis.”

“You have never seen our Africans, count?” said Albert.

“Let me go on, captain. And we have just heard,” continued Albert, “of a
new deed of his, and so heroic a one, that, although I have seen him
today for the first time, I request you to allow me to introduce him as
my friend.”

This exclamation, which corresponded to the count’s own thought rather
than to what Albert was saying, surprised everybody, and especially
Morrel, who looked at Monte Cristo with wonder. But, at the same time,
the intonation was so soft that, however strange the speech might seem,
it was impossible to be offended at it.

“In reality,” replied the latter, who, with his aristocratic glance and
his knowledge of the world, had penetrated at once all that was
penetrable in Monte Cristo, “Albert has not deceived us, for the count
is a most singular being. What say you, Morrel!”

“Gentlemen,” said Albert, “Germain informs me that breakfast is ready.
My dear count, allow me to show you the way.” They passed silently into
the breakfast-room, and everyone took his place.

The count was, it may be remembered, a most temperate guest. Albert
remarked this, expressing his fears lest, at the outset, the Parisian
mode of life should displease the traveller in the most essential point.

“One minute,” cried Albert, without giving Monte Cristo the time to
reply. “Take care, you are going to immure a traveller, Sinbad the
Sailor, a man who comes to see Paris; you are going to make a patriarch
of him.”

“It is Ali!” cried Albert, in the midst of the general surprise.

“Undeceive yourself, monsieur,” replied Monte Cristo; “I am quite sure,
that, on the contrary, he will choose everything as I wish. He knows my
tastes, my caprices, my wants. He has been here a week, with the
instinct of a hound, hunting by himself. He will arrange everything for
me. He knew, that I should arrive today at ten o’clock; he was waiting
for me at nine at the Barrière de Fontainebleau. He gave me this paper;
it contains the number of my new abode; read it yourself,” and Monte
Cristo passed a paper to Albert.

“Then,” continued Château-Renaud, “since you have an establishment, a
steward, and a hotel in the Champs-Élysées, you only want a mistress.”
Albert smiled. He thought of the fair Greek he had seen in the count’s
box at the Argentina and Valle theatres.

“My dear Albert,” said Debray, rising, “it is half-past two. Your guest
is charming, but you leave the best company to go into the worst
sometimes. I must return to the minister’s. I will tell him of the
count, and we shall soon know who he is.”

“Take care,” returned Albert; “no one has been able to accomplish that.”

“I promise you. Au revoir, Albert. Gentlemen, good morning.”

“Bravo,” said Beauchamp to Albert; “I shall not go to the Chamber, but I
have something better to offer my readers than a speech of M. Danglars.”

When Albert found himself alone with Monte Cristo, “My dear count,” said
he, “allow me to commence my services as cicerone by showing you a
specimen of a bachelor’s apartment. You, who are accustomed to the
palaces of Italy, can amuse yourself by calculating in how many square
feet a young man who is not the worst lodged in Paris can live. As we
pass from one room to another, I will open the windows to let you
breathe.”

Monte Cristo had already seen the breakfast-room and the salon on the
ground floor. Albert led him first to his atelier, which was, as we have
said, his favorite apartment. Monte Cristo quickly appreciated all that
Albert had collected here—old cabinets, Japanese porcelain, Oriental
stuffs, Venetian glass, arms from all parts of the world—everything was
familiar to him; and at the first glance he recognized their date, their
country, and their origin.

They descended to the first floor; Albert led his guest into the salon.
The salon was filled with the works of modern artists; there were
landscapes by Dupré, with their long reeds and tall trees, their lowing
oxen and marvellous skies; Delacroix’s Arabian cavaliers, with their
long white burnouses, their shining belts, their damasked arms, their
horses, who tore each other with their teeth while their riders
contended fiercely with their maces; aquarelles of Boulanger,
representing Notre Dame de Paris with that vigor that makes the artist
the rival of the poet; there were paintings by Diaz, who makes his
flowers more beautiful than flowers, his suns more brilliant than the
sun; designs by Decamp, as vividly colored as those of Salvator Rosa,
but more poetic; pastels by Giraud and Müller, representing children
like angels and women with the features of a virgin; sketches torn from
the album of Dauzats’ “Travels in the East,” that had been made in a few
seconds on the saddle of a camel, or beneath the dome of a mosque—in a
word, all that modern art can give in exchange and as recompense for the
art lost and gone with ages long since past.

Albert expected to have something new this time to show to the
traveller, but, to his great surprise, the latter, without seeking for
the signatures, many of which, indeed, were only initials, named
instantly the author of every picture in such a manner that it was easy
to see that each name was not only known to him, but that each style
associated with it had been appreciated and studied by him. From the
salon they passed into the bedchamber; it was a model of taste and
simple elegance. A single portrait, signed by Léopold Robert, shone in
its carved and gilded frame. This portrait attracted the Count of Monte
Cristo’s attention, for he made three rapid steps in the chamber, and
stopped suddenly before it.

It was the portrait of a young woman of five or six-and-twenty, with a
dark complexion, and light and lustrous eyes, veiled beneath long
lashes. She wore the picturesque costume of the Catalan fisherwomen, a
red and black bodice, and golden pins in her hair. She was looking at
the sea, and her form was outlined on the blue ocean and sky. The light
was so faint in the room that Albert did not perceive the pallor that
spread itself over the count’s visage, or the nervous heaving of his
chest and shoulders. Silence prevailed for an instant, during which
Monte Cristo gazed intently on the picture.

“Ah, monsieur,” returned Albert, “I would never forgive you this mistake
if you had seen another picture beside this. You do not know my mother;
she it is whom you see here. She had her portrait painted thus six or
eight years ago. This costume is a fancy one, it appears, and the
resemblance is so great that I think I still see my mother the same as
she was in 1830. The countess had this portrait painted during the
count’s absence. She doubtless intended giving him an agreeable
surprise; but, strange to say, this portrait seemed to displease my
father, and the value of the picture, which is, as you see, one of the
best works of Léopold Robert, could not overcome his dislike to it. It
is true, between ourselves, that M. de Morcerf is one of the most
assiduous peers at the Luxembourg, a general renowned for theory, but a
most mediocre amateur of art. It is different with my mother, who paints
exceedingly well, and who, unwilling to part with so valuable a picture,
gave it to me to put here, where it would be less likely to displease M.
de Morcerf, whose portrait, by Gros, I will also show you. Excuse my
talking of family matters, but as I shall have the honor of introducing
you to the count, I tell you this to prevent you making any allusions to
this picture. The picture seems to have a malign influence, for my
mother rarely comes here without looking at it, and still more rarely
does she look at it without weeping. This disagreement is the only one
that has ever taken place between the count and countess, who are still
as much united, although married more than twenty years, as on the first
day of their wedding.”

Monte Cristo glanced rapidly at Albert, as if to seek a hidden meaning
in his words, but it was evident the young man uttered them in the
simplicity of his heart.

“Now,” said Albert, “that you have seen all my treasures, allow me to
offer them to you, unworthy as they are. Consider yourself as in your
own house, and to put yourself still more at your ease, pray accompany
me to the apartments of M. de Morcerf, he whom I wrote from Rome an
account of the services you rendered me, and to whom I announced your
promised visit, and I may say that both the count and countess anxiously
desire to thank you in person. You are somewhat blasé I know, and family
scenes have not much effect on Sinbad the Sailor, who has seen so many
others. However, accept what I propose to you as an initiation into
Parisian life—a life of politeness, visiting, and introductions.”

Monte Cristo bowed without making any answer; he accepted the offer
without enthusiasm and without regret, as one of those conventions of
society which every gentleman looks upon as a duty. Albert summoned his
servant, and ordered him to acquaint M. and Madame de Morcerf of the
arrival of the Count of Monte Cristo. Albert followed him with the
count. When they arrived at the antechamber, above the door was visible
a shield, which, by its rich ornaments and its harmony with the rest of
the furniture, indicated the importance the owner attached to this
blazon. Monte Cristo stopped and examined it attentively.

Albert looked on and listened with astonishment; he was not used to see
Monte Cristo give vent to such bursts of enthusiasm.

“Ah, father,” said Albert with a smile, “it is evident you do not know
the Count of Monte Cristo; he despises all honors, and contents himself
with those written on his passport.”

“My dear Count,” said Albert, “I will endeavor to return your politeness
at Rome, and place my coupé at your disposal until your own be ready.”

Albert was used to the count’s manner of proceeding; he knew that, like
Nero, he was in search of the impossible, and nothing astonished him,
but wishing to judge with his own eyes how far the count’s orders had
been executed, he accompanied him to the door of the house. Monte Cristo
was not deceived. As soon as he appeared in the Count of Morcerf’s
antechamber, a footman, the same who at Rome had brought the count’s
card to the two young men, and announced his visit, sprang into the
vestibule, and when he arrived at the door the illustrious traveller
found his carriage awaiting him. It was a coupé of Koller’s building,
and with horses and harness for which Drake had, to the knowledge of all
the lions of Paris, refused on the previous day seven hundred guineas.

“Monsieur,” said the count to Albert, “I do not ask you to accompany me
to my house, as I can only show you a habitation fitted up in a hurry,
and I have, as you know, a reputation to keep up as regards not being
taken by surprise. Give me, therefore, one more day before I invite you;
I shall then be certain not to fail in my hospitality.”

When Albert returned to his mother, he found her in the boudoir
reclining in a large velvet armchair, the whole room so obscure that
only the shining spangle, fastened here and there to the drapery, and
the angles of the gilded frames of the pictures, showed with some degree
of brightness in the gloom. Albert could not see the face of the
countess, as it was covered with a thin veil she had put on her head,
and which fell over her features in misty folds, but it seemed to him as
though her voice had altered. He could distinguish amid the perfumes of
the roses and heliotropes in the flower-stands, the sharp and fragrant
odor of volatile salts, and he noticed in one of the chased cups on the
mantle-piece the countess’s smelling-bottle, taken from its shagreen
case, and exclaimed in a tone of uneasiness, as he entered:

“No, no, Albert, but you know these roses, tuberoses, and orange-flowers
throw out at first, before one is used to them, such violent perfumes.”

“Then, my dear mother,” said Albert, putting his hand to the bell, “they
must be taken into the antechamber. You are really ill, and just now
were so pale as you came into the room——”

“Was I pale, Albert?”

A servant entered, summoned by Albert’s ring of the bell.

“You have seen, my dear Albert—I ask the question as a mother—you have
seen M. de Monte Cristo in his house, you are quicksighted, have much
knowledge of the world, more tact than is usual at your age, do you
think the count is really what he appears to be?”

“But what is your own opinion, Albert?”

“So young,—it is impossible,” said Mercédès, replying at the same time
to what Albert said as well as to her own private reflection.

“And has this man displayed a friendship for you, Albert?” she asked
with a nervous shudder.

“Albert,” she said, in a voice which was altered by emotion, “I have
always put you on your guard against new acquaintances. Now you are a
man, and are able to give me advice; yet I repeat to you, Albert, be
prudent.”

“You are right,” said the countess, “and my fears are weakness,
especially when directed against a man who has saved your life. How did
your father receive him, Albert? It is necessary that we should be more
than complaisant to the count. M. de Morcerf is sometimes occupied, his
business makes him reflective, and he might, without intending it——”

“Nothing could be in better taste than my father’s demeanor, madame,”
said Albert; “nay, more, he seemed greatly flattered at two or three
compliments which the count very skilfully and agreeably paid him with
as much ease as if he had known him these thirty years. Each of these
little tickling arrows must have pleased my father,” added Albert with a
laugh. “And thus they parted the best possible friends, and M. de
Morcerf even wished to take him to the Chamber to hear the speakers.”

Lucien had found time, preparatory to the count’s arrival, to relate
many particulars respecting him to Madame Danglars. It will be
remembered that Monte Cristo had made a lively impression on the minds
of all the party assembled at the breakfast given by Albert de Morcerf;
and although Debray was not in the habit of yielding to such feelings,
he had never been able to shake off the powerful influence excited in
his mind by the impressive look and manner of the count, consequently
the description given by Lucien to the baroness bore the highly-colored
tinge of his own heated imagination. Already excited by the wonderful
stories related of the count by de Morcerf, it is no wonder that Madame
Danglars eagerly listened to, and fully credited, all the additional
circumstances detailed by Debray. This posing at the piano and over the
album was only a little ruse adopted by way of precaution. A most
gracious welcome and unusual smile were bestowed on M. Danglars; the
count, in return for his gentlemanly bow, received a formal though
graceful courtesy, while Lucien exchanged with the count a sort of
distant recognition, and with Danglars a free and easy nod.

That night the adventure at Auteuil was talked of everywhere. Albert
related it to his mother; Château-Renaud recounted it at the Jockey
Club, and Debray detailed it at length in the salons of the minister;
even Beauchamp accorded twenty lines in his journal to the relation of
the count’s courage and gallantry, thereby celebrating him as the
greatest hero of the day in the eyes of all the feminine members of the
aristocracy.

“Surely,” said Albert, as the door of a box on the first circle opened,
“that must be the Countess G——.”

“Herself.” At this moment the countess perceived Albert, and returned
his salutation with a smile.

“Franz introduced me to her at Rome,” replied Albert.

“Then,” answered Albert, “I am better informed than you are, and know
who the owner of that horse was.”

Albert turned round, just in time to receive a gracious wave of the fan
from the baroness; as for Mademoiselle Eugénie, she scarcely vouchsafed
to waste the glances of her large black eyes even upon the business of
the stage.

“Handsome, certainly,” replied Albert, “but not to my taste, which I
confess, inclines to something softer, gentler, and more feminine.”

Morcerf and Château-Renaud were amongst the first to avail themselves of
this permission. For an instant the idea struck Madame Danglars that
this eagerness on the part of the young viscount arose from his
impatience to join her party, and she whispered her expectations to her
daughter, that Albert was hurrying to pay his respects to them.
Mademoiselle Eugénie, however, merely returned a dissenting movement of
the head, while, with a cold smile, she directed the attention of her
mother to an opposite box on the first circle, in which sat the Countess
G——, and where Morcerf had just made his appearance.

“Be assured,” replied Albert, “that if I had been aware of your arrival
in Paris, and had known your address, I should have paid my respects to
you before this. Allow me to introduce my friend, Baron de Château-
Renaud, one of the few true gentlemen now to be found in France, and
from whom I have just learned that you were a spectator of the races in
the Champ-de-Mars, yesterday.”

“I am sorry to say I cannot,” replied the baron; “and I was just asking
the same question of Albert.”

“Are you very anxious to know, countess?” asked Albert.

“Why,” said Albert, “he was talked about for a week; then the coronation
of the queen of England took place, followed by the theft of
Mademoiselle Mars’s diamonds; and so people talked of something else.”

“My good fellow,” said Château-Renaud, “the count is your friend and you
treat him accordingly. Do not believe what Albert is telling you,
countess; so far from the sensation excited in the Parisian circles by
the appearance of the Count of Monte Cristo having abated, I take upon
myself to declare that it is as strong as ever. His first astounding act
upon coming amongst us was to present a pair of horses, worth 32,000
francs, to Madame Danglars; his second, the almost miraculous
preservation of Madame de Villefort’s life; now it seems that he has
carried off the prize awarded by the Jockey Club. I therefore maintain,
in spite of Morcerf, that not only is the count the object of interest
at this present moment, but also that he will continue to be so for a
month longer if he pleases to exhibit an eccentricity of conduct which,
after all, may be his ordinary mode of existence.”

At this moment the bell rang to announce the drawing up of the curtain
for the second act. Albert rose to return to his place.

“Hullo,” said Albert; “it is Monte Cristo and his Greek!”

Upon this occasion an unmistakable sign from Madame Danglars intimated
her desire to see Albert in her box directly the curtain fell on the
second act, and neither the politeness nor good taste of Morcerf would
permit his neglecting an invitation so unequivocally given. At the close
of the act he therefore went to the baroness.

“I was not aware of it,” replied Albert, “but I can readily believe it.”

“Mademoiselle,” said Albert, replying to this direct appeal, “I can give
you very exact information on that subject, as well as on most points
relative to the mysterious person of whom we are now conversing—the
young woman is a Greek.”

“I am going,” said Albert, as he made his parting bow.

Just as he was passing the count’s box, the door opened, and Monte
Cristo came forth. After giving some directions to Ali, who stood in the
lobby, the count took Albert’s arm. Carefully closing the box door, Ali
placed himself before it, while a crowd of spectators assembled round
the Nubian.

“Do you observe,” said the Countess G—— to Albert, who had returned to
her side, “that man does nothing like other people; he listens most
devoutly to the third act of Robert le Diable, and when the fourth
begins, takes his departure.”

Some days after this meeting, Albert de Morcerf visited the Count of
Monte Cristo at his house in the Champs-Élysées, which had already
assumed that palace-like appearance which the count’s princely fortune
enabled him to give even to his most temporary residences. He came to
renew the thanks of Madame Danglars which had been already conveyed to
the count through the medium of a letter, signed “Baronne Danglars, née
Hermine de Servieux.”

Albert was accompanied by Lucien Debray, who, joining in his friend’s
conversation, added some passing compliments, the source of which the
count’s talent for finesse easily enabled him to guess. He was convinced
that Lucien’s visit was due to a double feeling of curiosity, the larger
half of which sentiment emanated from the Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin. In
short, Madame Danglars, not being able personally to examine in detail
the domestic economy and household arrangements of a man who gave away
horses worth 30,000 francs and who went to the opera with a Greek slave
wearing diamonds to the amount of a million of money, had deputed those
eyes, by which she was accustomed to see, to give her a faithful account
of the mode of life of this incomprehensible person. But the count did
not appear to suspect that there could be the slightest connection
between Lucien’s visit and the curiosity of the baroness.

“You are in constant communication with the Baron Danglars?” the count
inquired of Albert de Morcerf.

“Very pretty, or rather, very beautiful,” replied Albert, “but of that
style of beauty which I do not appreciate; I am an ungrateful fellow.”

“Ah,” returned Albert, in his turn looking around to see what Lucien was
doing.

Albert shook his head, and looked thoughtful.

“I do not know if that is her reason,” said Albert, “but one thing I do
know, that if this marriage be consummated, it will render her quite
miserable. There was to have been a meeting six weeks ago in order to
talk over and settle the affair; but I had such a sudden attack of
indisposition——”

“Because,” said Albert, laughing, “one piece of news follows another,
and there is often great dissimilarity between them.”

“Ah, if I were in your place——” said Albert.

Lucien half smiled. Monte Cristo, although apparently indifferent, had
not lost one word of this conversation, and his penetrating eye had even
read a hidden secret in the embarrassed manner of the secretary. This
embarrassment had completely escaped Albert, but it caused Lucien to
shorten his visit; he was evidently ill at ease. The count, in taking
leave of him, said something in a low voice, to which he answered,
“Willingly, count; I accept.” The count returned to young Morcerf.

“I will do better than that,” said Albert; “my mother is wishing to go
to the sea-side—what day is fixed for your dinner?”

“Ah, my dear count,” said Albert.

“Certainly; I see you are a model Mentor,” said Albert “Good-bye, we
shall return on Sunday. By the way, I have received news of Franz.”

“And you know I am to marry Mademoiselle Danglars,” said Albert,
laughing.

Albert rose.

“Nothing is impossible,” gravely replied Monte Cristo; and taking leave
of Albert, he returned into the house, and struck the gong three times.
Bertuccio appeared.

Both the count and Baptistin had told the truth when they announced to
Morcerf the proposed visit of the major, which had served Monte Cristo
as a pretext for declining Albert’s invitation. Seven o’clock had just
struck, and M. Bertuccio, according to the command which had been given
him, had two hours before left for Auteuil, when a cab stopped at the
door, and after depositing its occupant at the gate, immediately hurried
away, as if ashamed of its employment. The visitor was about fifty-two
years of age, dressed in one of the green surtouts, ornamented with
black frogs, which have so long maintained their popularity all over
Europe. He wore trousers of blue cloth, boots tolerably clean, but not
of the brightest polish, and a little too thick in the soles, buckskin
gloves, a hat somewhat resembling in shape those usually worn by the
gendarmes, and a black cravat striped with white, which, if the
proprietor had not worn it of his own free will, might have passed for a
halter, so much did it resemble one. Such was the picturesque costume of
the person who rang at the gate, and demanded if it was not at No. 30 in
the Avenue des Champs-Élysées that the Count of Monte Cristo lived, and
who, being answered by the porter in the affirmative, entered, closed
the gate after him, and began to ascend the steps.

“If such be the case, my dear Valentine, you must yourself have felt, or
at all events will soon feel, the effects of his presence. He meets
Albert de Morcerf in Italy—it is to rescue him from the hands of the
banditti; he introduces himself to Madame Danglars—it is that he may
give her a royal present; your step-mother and her son pass before his
door—it is that his Nubian may save them from destruction. This man
evidently possesses the power of influencing events, both as regards men
and things. I never saw more simple tastes united to greater
magnificence. His smile is so sweet when he addresses me, that I forget
it ever can be bitter to others. Ah, Valentine, tell me, if he ever
looked on you with one of those sweet smiles? if so, depend on it, you
will be happy.”

“You are not thinking of Mademoiselle Danglars, I hope; you would not
like poor Andrea to have his throat cut by Albert?”

“Albert,” repeated Danglars, shrugging his shoulders; “ah, well; he
would care very little about it, I think.”

“Well, M. de Morcerf and I have talked about this marriage, but Madame
de Morcerf and Albert——”

“But still, if Albert be not so rich as Mademoiselle Danglars,” said the
count, “you must allow that he has a fine name?”

“And for this very reason,” said Danglars with a smile, which he tried
to make sardonic, “I prefer M. Andrea Cavalcanti to M. Albert de
Morcerf.”

The same day during the interview between Madame Danglars and the
procureur, a travelling-carriage entered the Rue du Helder, passed
through the gateway of No. 27, and stopped in the yard. In a moment the
door was opened, and Madame de Morcerf alighted, leaning on her son’s
arm. Albert soon left her, ordered his horses, and having arranged his
toilet, drove to the Champs-Élysées, to the house of Monte Cristo.

“Come, come,” said Albert, “do not assume so much indifference. It is
said, sympathy travels rapidly, and when at Tréport, I felt the electric
shock; you have either been working for me or thinking of me.”

Monte Cristo turned pale, and looked at Albert, while playing with some
magnificent pistols.

“Thus I shall rejoice when Mademoiselle Eugénie perceives I am but a
pitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundred thousand francs as she has
millions.” Monte Cristo smiled. “One plan occurred to me,” continued
Albert; “Franz likes all that is eccentric; I tried to make him fall in
love with Mademoiselle Danglars; but in spite of four letters, written
in the most alluring style, he invariably answered: ‘My eccentricity may
be great, but it will not make me break my promise.’”

“That is what I call devoted friendship, to recommend to another one
whom you would not marry yourself.” Albert smiled.

“Because I am not compelled to marry his daughter perhaps,” replied
Albert, laughing.

“Bah!” said Albert, staring.

“Am I, indeed, so happy?” said Albert, who still could not prevent an
almost imperceptible cloud passing across his brow. “But, my dear count,
has M. Danglars any reason?”

“Ah, count,” said Albert, “I assure you Madame de Morcerf speaks freely
to me, and if you have not felt those sympathetic fibres of which I
spoke just now thrill within you, you must be entirely devoid of them,
for during the last four days we have spoken of no one else.”

“Yes, truly; and I assure you. You are the only man of whom I have heard
her speak with interest.” Albert rose and took his hat; the count
conducted him to the door.

“I have one thing to reproach myself with,” said he, stopping Albert on
the steps. “What is it?”

“Yes, I promised you.” The Count watched Albert, waving his hand to him.
When he had mounted his phaeton, Monte Cristo turned, and seeing
Bertuccio, “What news?” said he.

And the two carriages passed on towards their different destinations.
Madame Danglars therefore came, not only beautiful in person, but
radiant with splendor; she entered by one door at the time when Mercédès
appeared at the door. The countess took Albert to meet Madame Danglars.
He approached, paid her some well merited compliments on her toilet, and
offered his arm to conduct her to a seat. Albert looked around him.

“I confess it,” replied Albert. “Could you have been so cruel as not to
bring her?”

“Seventeen!” replied Albert.

Albert bowed to Madame Danglars, and advanced towards Madame de
Villefort, whose lips opened as he approached.

“I wager anything,” said Albert, interrupting her, “that I know what you
were about to say.”

Just then, a handsome young man, with bright eyes, black hair, and
glossy moustache, respectfully bowed to Madame de Villefort. Albert
extended his hand.

“Madame,” said Albert, “allow me to present to you M. Maximilian Morrel,
captain of Spahis, one of our best, and, above all, of our bravest
officers.”

Meanwhile he advanced through the assemblage of guests under a battery
of curious glances towards Madame de Morcerf, who, standing before a
mantle-piece ornamented with flowers, had seen his entrance in a
looking-glass placed opposite the door, and was prepared to receive him.
She turned towards him with a serene smile just at the moment he was
bowing to her. No doubt she fancied the count would speak to her, while
on his side the count thought she was about to address him; but both
remained silent, and after a mere bow, Monte Cristo directed his steps
to Albert, who received him cordially.

“Have you seen my mother?” asked Albert.

“Very likely,” said Albert.

Albert laughed.

“Certainly,” replied Albert, “seeing that without my title I should be
nothing; while you, sacrificing the baron, would still remain the
millionaire.”

Albert had left the count to speak to his mother, Danglars to converse
with young Cavalcanti; Monte Cristo was for an instant alone. Meanwhile
the heat became excessive. The footmen were hastening through the rooms
with waiters loaded with ices. Monte Cristo wiped the perspiration from
his forehead, but drew back when the waiter was presented to him; he
took no refreshment. Madame de Morcerf did not lose sight of Monte
Cristo; she saw that he took nothing, and even noticed his gesture of
refusal.

“Albert,” she asked, “did you notice that?”

“Just to please me, Albert,” said Mercédès. Albert kissed his mother’s
hand, and drew near the count. Another salver passed, loaded like the
preceding ones; she saw Albert attempt to persuade the count, but he
obstinately refused. Albert rejoined his mother; she was very pale.

“You know, Albert, women are singular creatures. I should like to have
seen the count take something in my house, if only an ice. Perhaps he
cannot reconcile himself to the French style of living, and might prefer
something else.”

Albert at this moment ran in. “Oh, mother,” he exclaimed, “such a
misfortune has happened!”

“Albert, Albert,” said Madame de Morcerf, in a tone of mild reproof,
“what are you saying? Ah, count, he esteems you so highly, tell him that
he has spoken amiss.”

“Do not my mother and you agree?” asked Albert, astonished.

More than once she thought of revealing all to her grandmother, and she
would not have hesitated a moment, if Maximilian Morrel had been named
Albert de Morcerf or Raoul de Château-Renaud; but Morrel was of plebeian
extraction, and Valentine knew how the haughty Marquise de Saint-Méran
despised all who were not noble. Her secret had each time been repressed
when she was about to reveal it, by the sad conviction that it would be
useless to do so; for, were it once discovered by her father and mother,
all would be lost.

“I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since,” said Morrel; “we
were speaking, he of the sorrow your family had experienced, and I of
your grief, when a carriage rolled into the courtyard. Never, till then,
had I placed any confidence in presentiments, but now I cannot help
believing them, Valentine. At the sound of that carriage I shuddered;
soon I heard steps on the staircase, which terrified me as much as the
footsteps of the commander did Don Juan. The door at last opened; Albert
de Morcerf entered first, and I began to hope my fears were vain, when,
after him, another young man advanced, and the count exclaimed: ‘Ah,
here is the Baron Franz d’Épinay!’ I summoned all my strength and
courage to my support. Perhaps I turned pale and trembled, but certainly
I smiled; and five minutes after I left, without having heard one word
that had passed.”

“Franz assured me,” replied Albert, “that she was sixty-six years old.
But she has not died of old age, but of grief; it appears that since the
death of the marquis, which affected her very deeply, she has not
completely recovered her reason.”

“At any rate,” said Albert, “whatever disease or doctor may have killed
her, M. de Villefort, or rather, Mademoiselle Valentine,—or, still
rather, our friend Franz, inherits a magnificent fortune, amounting, I
believe, to 80,000 livres per annum.”

“Ideas and men appeared the same to him,” said Albert. “One thing only
puzzles me, namely, how Franz d’Épinay will like a grandfather who
cannot be separated from his wife. But where is Franz?”

“I am no acquaintance of M. de Villefort’s,” answered Morrel, “but I was
of Madame de Saint-Méran.” Albert came up to them at this moment with
Franz.

“The time and place are but ill-suited for an introduction.” said
Albert; “but we are not superstitious. M. Morrel, allow me to present to
you M. Franz d’Épinay, a delightful travelling companion, with whom I
made the tour of Italy. My dear Franz, M. Maximilian Morrel, an
excellent friend I have acquired in your absence, and whose name you
will hear me mention every time I make any allusion to affection, wit,
or amiability.”

“I am prejudiced against Beauchamp,” said Albert, drawing Franz away,
and leaving the former to finish his philosophical dissertation with
Debray.

As the religious ceremonies had all been performed at the door, and
there was no address given, the party all separated; Château-Renaud,
Albert, and Morrel, went one way, and Debray and Beauchamp the other.
Franz remained with M. de Villefort; at the gate of the cemetery Morrel
made an excuse to wait; he saw Franz and M. de Villefort get into the
same mourning-coach, and thought this meeting forboded evil. He then
returned to Paris, and although in the same carriage with Château-Renaud
and Albert, he did not hear one word of their conversation.

“I wish Albert de Morcerf and Raoul de Château-Renaud to be present at
this signature; you know they are my witnesses.”

Two carriages were soon heard to enter the courtyard. One was the
notary’s; the other, that of Franz and his friends. In a moment the
whole party was assembled. Valentine was so pale one might trace the
blue veins from her temples, round her eyes and down her cheeks. Franz
was deeply affected. Château-Renaud and Albert looked at each other with
amazement; the ceremony which was just concluded had not appeared more
sorrowful than did that which was about to begin. Madame de Villefort
had placed herself in the shadow behind a velvet curtain, and as she
constantly bent over her child, it was difficult to read the expression
of her face. M. de Villefort was, as usual, unmoved.

Villefort started, Madame de Villefort let her son slip from her knees,
Valentine rose, pale and dumb as a statue. Albert and Château-Renaud
exchanged a second look, more full of amazement than the first. The
notary looked at Villefort.

“He? You are mistaken. M. Albert would not do us the honor to be
jealous; he does not like Eugénie sufficiently. Besides, I care not for
his displeasure.”

The valet announced the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf. The baroness rose
hastily, and was going into the study, when Danglars stopped her.

She looked at him in amazement. Monte Cristo appeared to be unconscious
of what passed. Albert entered, looking very handsome and in high
spirits. He bowed politely to the baroness, familiarly to Danglars, and
affectionately to Monte Cristo. Then turning to the baroness: “May I ask
how Mademoiselle Danglars is?” said he.

Albert retained his calm and indifferent manner; he might feel perhaps
annoyed, but he knew Monte Cristo’s eye was on him. “M. Cavalcanti has a
fine tenor voice,” said he, “and Mademoiselle Eugénie a splendid
soprano, and then she plays the piano like Thalberg. The concert must be
a delightful one.”

“They suit each other remarkably well,” said Danglars. Albert appeared
not to notice this remark, which was, however, so rude that Madame
Danglars blushed.

“What prince?” asked Albert.

“Pardon me,” said Albert, “I was not aware that he was a prince. And
Prince Cavalcanti sang with Mademoiselle Eugénie yesterday? It must have
been charming, indeed. I regret not having heard them. But I was unable
to accept your invitation, having promised to accompany my mother to a
German concert given by the Baroness of Château-Renaud.”

“Indeed,” said Albert, “it is exquisite; it is impossible to understand
the music of his country better than Prince Cavalcanti does. You said
prince, did you not? But he can easily become one, if he is not already;
it is no uncommon thing in Italy. But to return to the charming
musicians—you should give us a treat, Danglars, without telling them
there is a stranger. Ask them to sing one more song; it is so delightful
to hear music in the distance, when the musicians are unrestrained by
observation.”

“Ah, baron, baron,” said Albert, “you are not listening—what barbarism
in a megalomaniac like you!”

The baroness took advantage of her husband’s absence to push open the
door of her daughter’s study, and M. Andrea, who was sitting before the
piano with Mademoiselle Eugénie, started up like a jack-in-the-box.
Albert bowed with a smile to Mademoiselle Danglars, who did not appear
in the least disturbed, and returned his bow with her usual coolness.
Cavalcanti was evidently embarrassed; he bowed to Morcerf, who replied
with the most impertinent look possible. Then Albert launched out in
praise of Mademoiselle Danglars’ voice, and on his regret, after what he
had just heard, that he had been unable to be present the previous
evening.

“How is King Otho getting on?” asked Albert in the most sprightly tone.

“We shall go together, shall we not?” said Albert to the count.

Albert could not understand the banker’s look, and turning to Monte
Cristo, who understood it perfectly,—“Did you see,” said he, “how he
looked at me?”

“Stop,” said Albert, “here he comes. I shall compliment Mademoiselle
Danglars on her cameo, while the father talks to you.”

Albert advanced towards Eugénie, smiling.

“Very well.” The count made a sign to Albert and they bowed to the
ladies, and took their leave, Albert perfectly indifferent to
Mademoiselle Danglars’ contempt, Monte Cristo reiterating his advice to
Madame Danglars on the prudence a banker’s wife should exercise in
providing for the future.

Scarcely had the count’s horses cleared the angle of the boulevard, when
Albert, turning towards the count, burst into a loud fit of
laughter—much too loud in fact not to give the idea of its being rather
forced and unnatural.

“Oh,” said Albert with all the cajolery of which he was capable. “You
surely will not do that, my dear count?”

“Certainly I shall, Albert, as I have promised to do it.”

“Well,” said Albert, with a sigh, “it seems you are determined to marry
me.”

“Where have you come from, my dear count?” said Albert.

“It is quite wonderful,” said Albert.

“Oh, that is charming,” said Albert, “how I should like to hear my
countrywomen called Mademoiselle Goodness, Mademoiselle Silence,
Mademoiselle Christian Charity! Only think, then, if Mademoiselle
Danglars, instead of being called Claire-Marie-Eugénie, had been named
Mademoiselle Chastity-Modesty-Innocence Danglars; what a fine effect
that would have produced on the announcement of her marriage!”

“She is very amiable, then, is she not?” said Albert.

“Very well,” said Albert, extending his hand; “I swear I will not.”

Ali reappeared for the third time, and drew back the tapestried hanging
which concealed the door, to signify to his master and Albert that they
were at liberty to pass on.

Albert passed his hand through his hair, and curled his moustache, then,
having satisfied himself as to his personal appearance, followed the
count into the room, the latter having previously resumed his hat and
gloves. Ali was stationed as a kind of advanced guard, and the door was
kept by the three French attendants, commanded by Myrtho.

Albert had proceeded no farther than the door, where he remained rooted
to the spot, being completely fascinated by the sight of such surpassing
beauty, beheld as it was for the first time, and of which an inhabitant
of more northern climes could form no adequate idea.

“Count Albert; it is the same man whom I rescued from the hands of the
banditti at Rome.”

Monte Cristo turned to Albert. “Do you know modern Greek,” asked he.

“Alas! no,” said Albert; “nor even ancient Greek, my dear count; never
had Homer or Plato a more unworthy scholar than myself.”

“Then,” said Haydée, proving by her remark that she had quite understood
Monte Cristo’s question and Albert’s answer, “then I will speak either
in French or Italian, if my lord so wills it.”

Then, turning towards Albert,—“It is a pity you do not understand either
ancient or modern Greek, both of which Haydée speaks so fluently; the
poor child will be obliged to talk to you in Italian, which will give
you but a very false idea of her powers of conversation.”

The count made a sign to Haydée to address his visitor. “Sir,” she said
to Morcerf, “you are most welcome as the friend of my lord and master.”
This was said in excellent Tuscan, and with that soft Roman accent which
makes the language of Dante as sonorous as that of Homer. Then, turning
to Ali, she directed him to bring coffee and pipes, and when he had left
the room to execute the orders of his young mistress she beckoned Albert
to approach nearer to her. Monte Cristo and Morcerf drew their seats
towards a small table, on which were arranged music, drawings, and vases
of flowers. Ali then entered bringing coffee and chibouques; as to M.
Baptistin, this portion of the building was interdicted to him. Albert
refused the pipe which the Nubian offered him.

Ali left the room. The cups of coffee were all prepared, with the
addition of sugar, which had been brought for Albert. Monte Cristo and
Haydée took the beverage in the original Arabian manner, that is to say,
without sugar. Haydée took the porcelain cup in her little slender
fingers and conveyed it to her mouth with all the innocent artlessness
of a child when eating or drinking something which it likes. At this
moment two women entered, bringing salvers filled with ices and sherbet,
which they placed on two small tables appropriated to that purpose.

“My dear host, and you, signora,” said Albert, in Italian, “excuse my
apparent stupidity. I am quite bewildered, and it is natural that it
should be so. Here I am in the heart of Paris; but a moment ago I heard
the rumbling of the omnibuses and the tinkling of the bells of the
lemonade-sellers, and now I feel as if I were suddenly transported to
the East; not such as I have seen it, but such as my dreams have painted
it. Oh, signora, if I could but speak Greek, your conversation, added to
the fairy-scene which surrounds me, would furnish an evening of such
delight as it would be impossible for me ever to forget.”

“On what subject shall I converse with her?” said Albert, in a low tone
to Monte Cristo.

“Oh,” said Albert, “it is of no use to be in the company of a Greek if
one converses just in the same style as with a Parisian; let me speak to
her of the East.”

Albert turned towards Haydée. “At what age did you leave Greece,
signora?” asked he.

“Then you remember everything that went on about you from the time when
you were three years old?” said Albert.

“Count,” said Albert, in a low tone to Monte Cristo, “do allow the
signora to tell me something of her history. You prohibited my
mentioning my father’s name to her, but perhaps she will allude to him
of her own accord in the course of the recital, and you have no idea how
delighted I should be to hear our name pronounced by such beautiful
lips.”

“Then,” said Albert, “this pious pilgrimage in behalf of the prisoners
was your first remembrance; what is the next?”

“It is very strange,” said Albert, “to hear such words proceed from the
mouth of anyone but an actress on the stage, and one needs constantly to
be saying to one’s self, ‘This is no fiction, it is all reality,’ in
order to believe it. And how does France appear in your eyes, accustomed
as they have been to gaze on such enchanted scenes?”

“So young,” said Albert, forgetting at the moment the Count’s command
that he should ask no questions of the slave herself, “is it possible
that you can have known what suffering is except by name?”

“Speak, speak, signora,” said Albert, “I am listening with the most
intense delight and interest to all you say.”

“I beg you to do so,” replied Albert.

Albert, without knowing why, started on hearing these words pronounced
with such a haughty and dignified accent; it appeared to him as if there
was something supernaturally gloomy and terrible in the expression which
gleamed from the brilliant eyes of Haydée at this moment; she appeared
like a Pythoness evoking a spectre, as she recalled to his mind the
remembrance of the fearful death of this man, to the news of which all
Europe had listened with horror.

“You were saying, signora,” said Albert, who was paying the most
implicit attention to the recital, “that the garrison of Yanina,
fatigued with long service——”

“And this officer,” asked Albert, “do you remember his name, signora?”

Monte Cristo exchanged a rapid glance with the young girl, which was
quite unperceived by Albert.

Albert was on the point of pronouncing his father’s name, when Monte
Cristo gently held up his finger in token of reproach; the young man
recollected his promise, and was silent.

Albert had often heard—not from his father, for he never spoke on the
subject, but from strangers—the description of the last moments of the
vizier of Yanina; he had read different accounts of his death, but the
story seemed to acquire fresh meaning from the voice and expression of
the young girl, and her sympathetic accent and the melancholy expression
of her countenance at once charmed and horrified him.

“It is a frightful story, count,” said Albert, terrified at the paleness
of Haydée’s countenance, “and I reproach myself now for having been so
cruel and thoughtless in my request.”

Albert looked at her with curiosity, for she had not yet related what he
most desired to know,—how she had become the slave of the count. Haydée
saw at a glance the same expression pervading the countenances of her
two auditors; she continued:

“Then,” said Albert, “you became the property of this man?”

“Of whom I bought her,” said Monte Cristo, “as I told you, Albert, with
the emerald which formed a match to the one I had made into a box for
the purpose of holding my hashish pills.”

Albert remained quite bewildered with all that he had seen and heard.

It was high time for her to make her appearance at the gate, for
Maximilian had long awaited her coming. He had half guessed what was
going on when he saw Franz quit the cemetery with M. de Villefort. He
followed M. d’Épinay, saw him enter, afterwards go out, and then re-
enter with Albert and Château-Renaud. He had no longer any doubts as to
the nature of the conference; he therefore quickly went to the gate in
the clover-patch, prepared to hear the result of the proceedings, and
very certain that Valentine would hasten to him the first moment she
should be set at liberty. He was not mistaken; peering through the
crevices of the wooden partition, he soon discovered the young girl, who
cast aside all her usual precautions and walked at once to the barrier.
The first glance which Maximilian directed towards her entirely
reassured him, and the first words she spoke made his heart bound with
delight.

“Baron, I have the honor of asking of you the hand of Mademoiselle
Eugénie Danglars for my son, the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf.”

At the same moment, that is, at nine o’clock in the morning, Albert de
Morcerf, dressed in a black coat buttoned up to his chin, might have
been seen walking with a quick and agitated step in the direction of
Monte Cristo’s house in the Champs-Élysées. When he presented himself at
the gate the porter informed him that the Count had gone out about half
an hour previously.

“My good friend,” said Albert, “I beg pardon for my intrusion, but I was
anxious to know from your own mouth if your master was really out or
not.”

Albert left the cab in which he had come at the count’s door, intending
to take a turn on foot. As he was passing the Allée des Veuves, he
thought he saw the count’s horses standing at Gosset’s shooting-gallery;
he approached, and soon recognized the coachman.

“Yes, sir,” replied the coachman. While he was speaking, Albert had
heard the report of two or three pistol-shots. He entered, and on his
way met the waiter.

“What for, Philip?” asked Albert, who, being a constant visitor there,
did not understand this opposition to his entrance.

“I ask your pardon, my dear count,” said Albert, “for following you
here, and I must first tell you that it was not the fault of your
servants that I did so; I alone am to blame for the indiscretion. I went
to your house, and they told me you were out, but that they expected you
home at ten o’clock to breakfast. I was walking about in order to pass
away the time till ten o’clock, when I caught sight of your carriage and
horses.”

“Come in, my lord,” said Philip in a low tone, “and I will show you
something droll.” Morcerf entered, and in place of the usual target, he
saw some playing-cards fixed against the wall. At a distance Albert
thought it was a complete suit, for he counted from the ace to the ten.

“Ah, ha,” said Albert, “I see you were preparing for a game of cards.”

“How?” said Albert.

Albert approached. In fact, the bullets had actually pierced the cards
in the exact places which the painted signs would otherwise have
occupied, the lines and distances being as regularly kept as if they had
been ruled with pencil. In going up to the target Morcerf picked up two
or three swallows that had been rash enough to come within the range of
the count’s pistol.

Both men entered Monte Cristo’s carriage, which in the course of a few
minutes deposited them safely at No. 30. Monte Cristo took Albert into
his study, and pointing to a seat, placed another for himself. “Now let
us talk the matter over quietly,” said the count.

“You see I am perfectly composed,” said Albert.

“There appeared in his journal last night—but wait, and read for
yourself.” And Albert handed over the paper to the count, who read as
follows:

Morcerf took his hat, and left the room. He found his carriage at the
door, and doing his utmost to restrain his anger he went at once to find
Beauchamp, who was in his office. It was a gloomy, dusty-looking
apartment, such as journalists’ offices have always been from time
immemorial. The servant announced M. Albert de Morcerf. Beauchamp
repeated the name to himself, as though he could scarcely believe that
he had heard aright, and then gave orders for him to be admitted. Albert
entered.

“This way, this way, my dear Albert!” said he, holding out his hand to
the young man. “Are you out of your senses, or do you come peaceably to
take breakfast with me? Try and find a seat—there is one by that
geranium, which is the only thing in the room to remind me that there
are other leaves in the world besides leaves of paper.”

“Beauchamp,” said Albert, “it is of your journal that I come to speak.”

“Thank you,” said Albert, with a cold and formal bow.

“Here, I have brought mine with me,” replied Albert.

Beauchamp took the paper, and read the article to which Albert pointed
in an undertone.

“Yes,” said Albert, blushing.

“My dear Beauchamp, I wish you to contradict this statement.” Beauchamp
looked at Albert with a benevolent expression.

Albert resumed his seat, and Beauchamp read, with more attention than at
first, the lines denounced by his friend.

“Well,” said Albert in a determined tone, “you see that your paper has
insulted a member of my family, and I insist on a retractation being
made.”

“Nor do I wish to be there,” replied the young man, rising. “I repeat
that I am determined to have the announcement of yesterday contradicted.
You have known me long enough,” continued Albert, biting his lips
convulsively, for he saw that Beauchamp’s anger was beginning to
rise,—“you have been my friend, and therefore sufficiently intimate with
me to be aware that I am likely to maintain my resolution on this
point.”

“He is merely my father,” said Albert—“M. Fernand Mondego, Count of
Morcerf, an old soldier who has fought in twenty battles and whose
honorable scars they would denounce as badges of disgrace.”

“Is it your father?” said Beauchamp; “that is quite another thing. Then
I can well understand your indignation, my dear Albert. I will look at
it again;” and he read the paragraph for the third time, laying a stress
on each word as he proceeded. “But the paper nowhere identifies this
Fernand with your father.”

At the words I will, Beauchamp steadily raised his eyes to Albert’s
countenance, and then as gradually lowering them, he remained thoughtful
for a few moments.

“You will retract this assertion, will you not, Beauchamp?” said Albert
with increased though stifled anger.

“Immediately?” said Albert.

“But what is there to investigate, sir?” said Albert, enraged beyond
measure at Beauchamp’s last remark. “If you do not believe that it is my
father, say so immediately; and if, on the contrary, you believe it to
be him, state your reasons for doing so.”

Beauchamp looked at Albert with the smile which was so peculiar to him,
and which in its numerous modifications served to express every varied
emotion of his mind.

“Yes, I insist on it,” said Albert, whose mind was beginning to get
bewildered with the excitement of his feelings.

“Yes,” replied Albert, raising his voice.

“Sir,” said Albert, rising, “I will do myself the honor of sending my
seconds to you, and you will be kind enough to arrange with them the
place of meeting and the weapons.”

“Three weeks!” cried Albert; “they will pass as slowly as three
centuries when I am all the time suffering dishonor.”

“M. Albert de Morcerf,” said Beauchamp, rising in his turn, “I cannot
throw you out of window for three weeks—that is to say, for twenty-four
days to come—nor have you any right to split my skull open till that
time has elapsed. Today is the 29th of August; the 21st of September
will, therefore, be the conclusion of the term agreed on, and till that
time arrives—and it is the advice of a gentleman which I am about to
give you—till then we will refrain from growling and barking like two
dogs chained within sight of each other.”

When he had concluded his speech, Beauchamp bowed coldly to Albert,
turned his back upon him, and went to the press-room. Albert vented his
anger on a pile of newspapers, which he sent flying all over the office
by switching them violently with his stick; after which ebullition he
departed—not, however, without walking several times to the door of the
press-room, as if he had half a mind to enter.

While Albert was lashing the front of his carriage in the same manner
that he had the newspapers which were the innocent agents of his
discomfiture, as he was crossing the barrier he perceived Morrel, who
was walking with a quick step and a bright eye. He was passing the
Chinese Baths, and appeared to have come from the direction of the Porte
Saint-Martin, and to be going towards the Madeleine.

“Ah,” said Morcerf, “there goes a happy man!” And it so happened Albert
was not mistaken in his opinion.

Albert, however, felt no less insulted; the few lines which had
irritated him were certainly intended as an insult. Besides, the manner
in which Beauchamp had closed the conference left a bitter recollection
in his heart. He cherished the thought of the duel, hoping to conceal
its true cause even from his seconds. Beauchamp had not been seen since
the day he visited Albert, and those of whom the latter inquired always
told him he was out on a journey which would detain him some days. Where
he was no one knew.

One morning Albert was awakened by his valet de chambre, who announced
Beauchamp. Albert rubbed his eyes, ordered his servant to introduce him
into the small smoking-room on the ground floor, dressed himself
quickly, and went down.

“Your arrival here, without waiting my visit at your house today, looks
well, sir,” said Albert. “Tell me, may I shake hands with you, saying,
‘Beauchamp, acknowledge you have injured me, and retain my friendship,’
or must I simply propose to you a choice of arms?”

“Albert,” said Beauchamp, with a look of sorrow which stupefied the
young man, “let us first sit down and talk.”

“Albert,” said the journalist, “these are questions which it is
difficult to answer.”

“What I have done, Albert. I reasoned thus—money, time, and fatigue are
nothing compared with the reputation and interests of a whole family;
probabilities will not suffice, only facts will justify a deadly combat
with a friend. If I strike with the sword, or discharge the contents of
a pistol at man with whom, for three years, I have been on terms of
intimacy, I must, at least, know why I do so; I must meet him with a
heart at ease, and that quiet conscience which a man needs when his own
arm must save his life.”

“Here is my passport; examine the visa—Geneva, Milan, Venice, Trieste,
Delvino, Yanina. Will you believe the government of a republic, a
kingdom, and an empire?” Albert cast his eyes on the passport, then
raised them in astonishment to Beauchamp.

“Albert, had you been a stranger, a foreigner, a simple lord, like that
Englishman who came to demand satisfaction three or four months since,
and whom I killed to get rid of, I should not have taken this trouble;
but I thought this mark of consideration due to you. I took a week to
go, another to return, four days of quarantine, and forty-eight hours to
stay there; that makes three weeks. I returned last night, and here I
am.”

“Because, in truth, Albert——”

Albert turned frightfully pale; he endeavored to speak, but the words
died on his lips.

Albert advanced furiously towards Beauchamp, but the latter restrained
him more by a mild look than by his extended hand.

Albert opened the paper, it was an attestation of four notable
inhabitants of Yanina, proving that Colonel Fernand Mondego, in the
service of Ali Tepelini, had surrendered the castle for two million
crowns. The signatures were perfectly legal. Albert tottered and fell
overpowered in a chair. It could no longer be doubted; the family name
was fully given. After a moment’s mournful silence, his heart
overflowed, and he gave way to a flood of tears. Beauchamp, who had
watched with sincere pity the young man’s paroxysm of grief, approached
him.

“Now, Albert,” said he, “you understand me—do you not? I wished to see
all, and to judge of everything for myself, hoping the explanation would
be in your father’s favor, and that I might do him justice. But, on the
contrary, the particulars which are given prove that Fernand Mondego,
raised by Ali Pasha to the rank of governor-general, is no other than
Count Fernand of Morcerf; then, recollecting the honor you had done me,
in admitting me to your friendship, I hastened to you.”

Albert, still extended on the chair, covered his face with both hands,
as if to prevent the light from reaching him.

“I hastened to you,” continued Beauchamp, “to tell you, Albert, that in
this changing age, the faults of a father cannot revert upon his
children. Few have passed through this revolutionary period, in the
midst of which we were born, without some stain of infamy or blood to
soil the uniform of the soldier, or the gown of the magistrate. Now I
have these proofs, Albert, and I am in your confidence, no human power
can force me to a duel which your own conscience would reproach you with
as criminal, but I come to offer you what you can no longer demand of
me. Do you wish these proofs, these attestations, which I alone possess,
to be destroyed? Do you wish this frightful secret to remain with us?
Confided to me, it shall never escape my lips; say, Albert, my friend,
do you wish it?”

Albert threw himself on Beauchamp’s neck.

“Take these,” said Beauchamp, presenting the papers to Albert.

Albert seized them with a convulsive hand, tore them in pieces, and
trembling lest the least vestige should escape and one day appear to
confront him, he approached the wax-light, always kept burning for
cigars, and burned every fragment.

“Dear, excellent friend,” murmured Albert, still burning the papers.

“Yes, yes,” said Albert, “and may there remain only the eternal
friendship which I promised to my deliverer, which shall be transmitted
to our children’s children, and shall always remind me that I owe my
life and the honor of my name to you,—for had this been known, oh,
Beauchamp, I should have destroyed myself; or,—no, my poor mother! I
could not have killed her by the same blow,—I should have fled from my
country.”

“Dear Albert,” said Beauchamp. But this sudden and factitious joy soon
forsook the young man, and was succeeded by a still greater grief.

“I am broken-hearted,” said Albert. “Listen, Beauchamp! I cannot thus,
in a moment relinquish the respect, the confidence, and pride with which
a father’s untarnished name inspires a son. Oh, Beauchamp, Beauchamp,
how shall I now approach mine? Shall I draw back my forehead from his
embrace, or withhold my hand from his? I am the most wretched of men.
Ah, my mother, my poor mother!” said Albert, gazing through his tears at
his mother’s portrait; “if you know this, how much must you suffer!”

“The more must you fortify yourself, Albert. Let no trace of emotion be
visible on your countenance, bear your grief as the cloud bears within
it ruin and death—a fatal secret, known only when the storm bursts. Go,
my friend, reserve your strength for the moment when the crash shall
come.”

“You think, then, all is not over yet?” said Albert, horror-stricken.

“What?” said Albert, seeing that Beauchamp hesitated.

“How?” said Albert, whose brow reddened; “you think M. Danglars——”

“No.” said Albert, “the engagement is broken off.”

“Well,” said Beauchamp. Then, seeing the young man was about to relapse
into melancholy, “Let us go out, Albert,” said he; “a ride in the wood
in the phaeton, or on horseback, will refresh you; we will then return
to breakfast, and you shall attend to your affairs, and I to mine.”

“Willingly,” said Albert; “but let us walk. I think a little exertion
would do me good.”

“Gladly,” said Albert; “let us call—I love him.”

“Albert will tell you,” replied the count “that I gave him the same
advice. Look,” added he. “I am finishing the most execrable morning’s
work.”

“What is it?” said Albert; “arranging your papers, apparently.”

“And who,” said Albert with a forced smile, “is to marry Mademoiselle
Danglars instead of me, which grieves me cruelly.”

“Ah, I understand,” said Beauchamp, “on our friend Albert’s account.”

“Oh, well, I don’t know; but I understand that she is going to Italy.
Madame Danglars asked me for letters of recommendation for the
impresari; I gave her a few lines for the director of the Valle Theatre,
who is under some obligation to me. But what is the matter, Albert? you
look dull; are you, after all, unconsciously in love with Mademoiselle
Eugénie?”

“I am not aware of it,” said Albert, smiling sorrowfully. Beauchamp
turned to look at some paintings.

“I have a dreadful headache,” said Albert.

“Indeed?” said Albert.

“What of that? come with us,” said Albert.

“Ah, you are a good and an excellent friend,” said Albert; “yes, you are
right; watch, watch, Beauchamp, and try to discover the enemy who made
this disclosure.”

Albert and Beauchamp parted, the last pressure of their hands expressing
what their tongues could not before a stranger.

“Beauchamp is a worthy fellow,” said Monte Cristo, when the journalist
was gone; “is he not, Albert?”

“You see, then,” said Albert, “that instead of opposing, she will
encourage me.”

Monte Cristo smiled as he nodded to Albert, then remained a moment
absorbed in deep meditation. But passing his hand across his forehead as
if to dispel his reverie, he rang the bell twice and Bertuccio entered.

Albert was punctual. The journey soon became interesting from its
rapidity, of which Morcerf had formed no previous idea.

“I countenance nothing that is marvellous, M. Albert. Tell me, why does
a steward rob his master?”

Albert bathed, took his supper, and went to bed. All night he was lulled
by the melancholy noise of the surf. On rising, he went to his window,
which opened on a terrace, having the sea in front, and at the back a
pretty park bounded by a small forest.

Albert found in his anteroom two guns, with all the accoutrements for
hunting; a lofty room on the ground floor containing all the ingenious
instruments the English—eminent in piscatory pursuits, since they are
patient and sluggish—have invented for fishing. The day passed in
pursuing those exercises in which Monte Cristo excelled. They killed a
dozen pheasants in the park, as many trout in the stream, dined in a
summer-house overlooking the ocean, and took tea in the library.

Towards the evening of the third day. Albert, completely exhausted with
the exercise which invigorated Monte Cristo, was sleeping in an armchair
near the window, while the count was designing with his architect the
plan of a conservatory in his house, when the sound of a horse at full
speed on the high road made Albert look up. He was disagreeably
surprised to see his own valet de chambre, whom he had not brought, that
he might not inconvenience Monte Cristo.

Albert opened the letter with fear, uttered a shriek on reading the
first line, and seized the paper. His sight was dimmed, his legs sank
under him, and he would have fallen had not Florentin supported him.

Meanwhile Albert had revived, and, continuing to read, he threw back his
head, saying:

“Yes, my mother,” said Albert, “I will return, and woe to the infamous
wretch! But first of all I must get there.”

Albert reeled as if he had been shot, and fell on a chair near the door.
Monte Cristo did not see this second manifestation of physical
exhaustion; he was at the window, calling:

These words restored Albert; he darted from the room, followed by the
count.

Albert hesitated a moment. “You may think my departure strange and
foolish,” said the young man; “you do not know how a paragraph in a
newspaper may exasperate one. Read that,” said he, “when I am gone, that
you may not be witness of my anger.”

Thus the terrible secret, which Beauchamp had so generously destroyed,
appeared again like an armed phantom; and another paper, deriving its
information from some malicious source, had published two days after
Albert’s departure for Normandy the few lines which had rendered the
unfortunate young man almost crazy.

At eight o’clock in the morning Albert had arrived at Beauchamp’s door.
The valet de chambre had received orders to usher him in at once.
Beauchamp was in his bath.

“Here I am,” Albert said.

Beauchamp understood that nothing remained but to submit, and left the
office to despatch a courier to Morcerf. But he had been unable to send
to Albert the following particulars, as the events had transpired after
the messenger’s departure; namely, that the same day a great agitation
was manifest in the House of Peers among the usually calm members of
that dignified assembly. Everyone had arrived almost before the usual
hour, and was conversing on the melancholy event which was to attract
the attention of the public towards one of their most illustrious
colleagues. Some were perusing the article, others making comments and
recalling circumstances which substantiated the charges still more.

Albert listened, trembling now with hope, then with anger, and then
again with shame, for from Beauchamp’s confidence he knew his father was
guilty, and he asked himself how, since he was guilty, he could prove
his innocence. Beauchamp hesitated to continue his narrative.

“What next?” asked Albert.

Albert passed his hand over his forehead, as if to try his strength, as
a man who is preparing to defend his life proves his shield and bends
his sword. He thought himself strong enough, for he mistook fever for
energy. “Go on,” said he.

Albert felt his heart bursting at these particulars, but gratitude
mingled with his sorrow: he would gladly have embraced those who had
given his father this proof of esteem at a moment when his honor was so
powerfully attacked.

“At this moment one of the door-keepers brought in a letter for the
president. ‘You are at liberty to speak, M. de Morcerf,’ said the
president, as he unsealed the letter; and the count began his defence, I
assure you, Albert, in a most eloquent and skilful manner. He produced
documents proving that the Vizier of Yanina had up to the last moment
honored him with his entire confidence, since he had interested him with
a negotiation of life and death with the emperor. He produced the ring,
his mark of authority, with which Ali Pasha generally sealed his
letters, and which the latter had given him, that he might, on his
return at any hour of the day or night, gain access to the presence,
even in the harem. Unfortunately, the negotiation failed, and when he
returned to defend his benefactor, he was dead. ‘But,’ said the count,
‘so great was Ali Pasha’s confidence, that on his death-bed he resigned
his favorite mistress and her daughter to my care.’”

Albert started on hearing these words; the history of Haydée recurred to
him, and he remembered what she had said of that message and the ring,
and the manner in which she had been sold and made a slave.

“And what effect did this discourse produce?” anxiously inquired Albert.

“A murmur of approbation ran through the assembly; and at this moment,
Albert, had nothing more transpired, your father’s cause had been
gained. It only remained to put it to the vote, when the president
resumed: ‘Gentlemen and you, monsieur,—you will not be displeased, I
presume, to listen to one who calls himself a very important witness,
and who has just presented himself. He is, doubtless, come to prove the
perfect innocence of our colleague. Here is a letter I have just
received on the subject; shall it be read, or shall it be passed over?
and shall we take no notice of this incident?’ M. de Morcerf turned
pale, and clenched his hands on the papers he held. The committee
decided to hear the letter; the count was thoughtful and silent. The
president read:

“Ah,” said Albert, “it was she.”

Then,” continued Beauchamp, “I took advantage of the silence and the
darkness to leave the house without being seen. The usher who had
introduced me was waiting for me at the door, and he conducted me
through the corridors to a private entrance opening into the Rue de
Vaugirard. I left with mingled feelings of sorrow and delight. Excuse
me, Albert,—sorrow on your account, and delight with that noble girl,
thus pursuing paternal vengeance. Yes, Albert, from whatever source the
blow may have proceeded—it may be from an enemy, but that enemy is only
the agent of Providence.”

Albert held his head between his hands; he raised his face, red with
shame and bathed in tears, and seizing Beauchamp’s arm:

“Contempt, my friend? How does this misfortune affect you? No, happily
that unjust prejudice is forgotten which made the son responsible for
the father’s actions. Review your life, Albert; although it is only just
beginning, did a lovely summer’s day ever dawn with greater purity than
has marked the commencement of your career? No, Albert, take my advice.
You are young and rich—leave Paris—all is soon forgotten in this great
Babylon of excitement and changing tastes. You will return after three
or four years with a Russian princess for a bride, and no one will think
more of what occurred yesterday than if it had happened sixteen years
ago.”

“He!” cried Albert; “yes, it is indeed he who has so long pursued my
father with jealous hatred. He, the man who would be popular, cannot
forgive the Count of Morcerf for being created a peer; and this marriage
broken off without a reason being assigned—yes, it is all from the same
cause.”

“Make inquiries, Albert, but do not be angry without reason; make
inquiries, and if it be true——”

“I do not condemn you, Albert; I only restrain you. Act prudently.”

“When such resolutions are made, Albert, they should be promptly
executed. Do you wish to go to M. Danglars? Let us go immediately.”

“Ah! parbleu! that’s good,” said Albert, with a gloomy tone. “If M.
Danglars will not fight with me, I will kill his son-in-law; Cavalcanti
will certainly fight.”

The servant announced the young man; but the banker, recollecting what
had transpired the day before, did not wish him admitted. It was,
however, too late; Albert had followed the footman, and, hearing the
order given, forced the door open, and followed by Beauchamp found
himself in the banker’s study.

“No, sir,” said Albert, coldly; “there are circumstances in which one
cannot, except through cowardice,—I offer you that refuge,—refuse to
admit certain persons at least.”

“I mean,” said Albert, drawing near, and without apparently noticing
Cavalcanti, who stood with his back towards the fireplace—“I mean to
propose a meeting in some retired corner where no one will interrupt us
for ten minutes; that will be sufficient—where two men having met, one
of them will remain on the ground.”

Danglars turned pale; Cavalcanti moved a step forward, and Albert turned
towards him.

Cavalcanti looked at Danglars with a stupefied air, and the latter,
making an effort, arose and stepped between the two young men. Albert’s
attack on Andrea had placed him on a different footing, and he hoped
this visit had another cause than that he had at first supposed.

“Indeed, sir,” said he to Albert, “if you are come to quarrel with this
gentleman because I have preferred him to you, I shall resign the case
to the king’s attorney.”

“Silence!” said Albert, with a thundering voice. “No; it is not you who
have directly made this exposure and brought this sorrow on us, but you
hypocritically provoked it.”

Albert and Beauchamp looked at each other.

Albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was no doubt upon the
subject. Danglars defended himself with the baseness, but at the same
time with the assurance, of a man who speaks the truth, at least in
part, if not wholly—not for conscience’ sake, but through fear. Besides,
what was Morcerf seeking? It was not whether Danglars or Monte Cristo
was more or less guilty; it was a man who would answer for the offence,
whether trifling or serious; it was a man who would fight, and it was
evident Danglars would not fight.

In addition to this, everything forgotten or unperceived before
presented itself now to his recollection. Monte Cristo knew everything,
as he had bought the daughter of Ali Pasha; and, knowing everything, he
had advised Danglars to write to Yanina. The answer known, he had
yielded to Albert’s wish to be introduced to Haydée, and allowed the
conversation to turn on the death of Ali, and had not opposed Haydée’s
recital (but having, doubtless, warned the young girl, in the few Romaic
words he spoke to her, not to implicate Morcerf’s father). Besides, had
he not begged of Morcerf not to mention his father’s name before Haydée?
Lastly, he had taken Albert to Normandy when he knew the final blow was
near. There could be no doubt that all had been calculated and
previously arranged; Monte Cristo then was in league with his father’s
enemies. Albert took Beauchamp aside, and communicated these ideas to
him.

Albert turned.

He bowed to the banker, and went out with Beauchamp, without appearing
to notice Cavalcanti. Danglars accompanied him to the door, where he
again assured Albert that no motive of personal hatred had influenced
him against the Count of Morcerf.

“My poor mother!” said Albert, passing his hand across his eyes, “I know
she would; but better so than die of shame.”

“Are you quite decided, Albert?”

They ordered the driver to take them to No. 30 Champs-Élysées. Beauchamp
wished to go in alone, but Albert observed that as this was an unusual
circumstance he might be allowed to deviate from the usual etiquette of
duels. The cause which the young man espoused was one so sacred that
Beauchamp had only to comply with all his wishes; he yielded and
contented himself with following Morcerf. Albert sprang from the
porter’s lodge to the steps. He was received by Baptistin. The count
had, indeed, just arrived, but he was in his bath, and had forbidden
that anyone should be admitted.

“Are you sure of it?” asked Albert.

“Very good,” replied Albert; “that is all I wished to know.”

Beauchamp availed himself of Albert’s permission, and left him,
promising to call for him at a quarter before eight. On his return home,
Albert expressed his wish to Franz Debray, and Morrel, to see them at
the Opera that evening. Then he went to see his mother, who since the
events of the day before had refused to see anyone, and had kept her
room. He found her in bed, overwhelmed with grief at this public
humiliation.

The sight of Albert produced the effect which might naturally be
expected on Mercédès; she pressed her son’s hand and sobbed aloud, but
her tears relieved her. Albert stood one moment speechless by the side
of his mother’s bed. It was evident from his pale face and knit brows
that his resolution to revenge himself was growing weaker.

“Do you say M. de Monte Cristo is our enemy?” replied Mercédès, becoming
paler than the sheet which covered her. “Who told you so? Why, you are
mad, Albert! M. de Monte Cristo has only shown us kindness. M. de Monte
Cristo saved your life; you yourself presented him to us. Oh, I entreat
you, my son, if you had entertained such an idea, dispel it; and my
counsel to you—nay, my prayer—is to retain his friendship.”

Mercédès shuddered, and, fixing on her son a scrutinizing gaze, “You
speak strangely,” said she to Albert, “and you appear to have some
singular prejudices. What has the count done? Three days since you were
with him in Normandy; only three days since we looked on him as our best
friend.”

An ironical smile passed over Albert’s lips. Mercédès saw it and with
the double instinct of woman and mother guessed all; but as she was
prudent and strong-minded she concealed both her sorrows and her fears.
Albert was silent; an instant after, the countess resumed:

“Well,” replied Mercédès, sighing, “go, Albert; I will not make you a
slave to your filial piety.”

Albert pretended he did not hear, bowed to his mother, and quitted her.
Scarcely had he shut her door, when Mercédès called a confidential
servant, and ordered him to follow Albert wherever he should go that
evening, and to come and tell her immediately what he observed. Then she
rang for her lady’s maid, and, weak as she was, she dressed, in order to
be ready for whatever might happen. The footman’s mission was an easy
one. Albert went to his room, and dressed with unusual care. At ten
minutes to eight Beauchamp arrived; he had seen Château-Renaud, who had
promised to be in the orchestra before the curtain was raised. Both got
into Albert’s coupé; and, as the young man had no reason to conceal
where he was going, he called aloud, “To the Opera.” In his impatience
he arrived before the beginning of the performance.

Château-Renaud was at his post; apprised by Beauchamp of the
circumstances, he required no explanation from Albert. The conduct of
the son in seeking to avenge his father was so natural that Château-
Renaud did not seek to dissuade him, and was content with renewing his
assurances of devotion. Debray was not yet come, but Albert knew that he
seldom lost a scene at the Opera.

Albert wandered about the theatre until the curtain was drawn up. He
hoped to meet with M. de Monte Cristo either in the lobby or on the
stairs. The bell summoned him to his seat, and he entered the orchestra
with Château-Renaud and Beauchamp. But his eyes scarcely quitted the box
between the columns, which remained obstinately closed during the whole
of the first act. At last, as Albert was looking at his watch for about
the hundredth time, at the beginning of the second act the door opened,
and Monte Cristo entered, dressed in black, and, leaning over the front
of the box, looked around the pit. Morrel followed him, and looked also
for his sister and brother in-law; he soon discovered them in another
box, and kissed his hand to them.

The count, in his survey of the pit, encountered a pale face and
threatening eyes, which evidently sought to gain his attention. He
recognized Albert, but thought it better not to notice him, as he looked
so angry and discomposed. Without communicating his thoughts to his
companion, he sat down, drew out his opera-glass, and looked another
way. Although apparently not noticing Albert, he did not, however, lose
sight of him, and when the curtain fell at the end of the second act, he
saw him leave the orchestra with his two friends. Then his head was seen
passing at the back of the boxes, and the count knew that the
approaching storm was intended to fall on him. He was at the moment
conversing cheerfully with Morrel, but he was well prepared for what
might happen.

The door opened, and Monte Cristo, turning round, saw Albert, pale and
trembling, followed by Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.

“We are not come here, sir, to exchange hypocritical expressions of
politeness, or false professions of friendship,” said Albert, “but to
demand an explanation.”

“Still, if people will shut themselves up,” said Albert, “and cannot be
seen because they are bathing, dining, or asleep, we must avail
ourselves of the opportunity whenever they are to be seen.”

In pronouncing these words Albert had raised his voice so as to be heard
by those in the adjoining boxes and in the lobby. Thus the attention of
many was attracted by this altercation.

“Provided I understand your perfidy, sir, and succeed in making you
understand that I will be revenged, I shall be reasonable enough,” said
Albert furiously.

“Ah, I shall know how to make you leave your home!” replied Albert,
clasping in his convulsed grasp the glove, which Monte Cristo did not
lose sight of.

At this name a murmur of astonishment passed around the group of
spectators of this scene. They had talked of no one but Morcerf the
whole day. Albert understood the allusion in a moment, and was about to
throw his glove at the count, when Morrel seized his hand, while
Beauchamp and Château-Renaud, fearing the scene would surpass the limits
of a challenge, held him back. But Monte Cristo, without rising, and
leaning forward in his chair, merely stretched out his arm and, taking
the damp, crushed glove from the clenched hand of the young man:

Wild, almost unconscious, and with eyes inflamed, Albert stepped back,
and Morrel closed the door. Monte Cristo took up his glass again as if
nothing had happened; his face was like marble, and his heart was like
bronze. Morrel whispered, “What have you done to him?”

“Yes. Albert wrote to request me to come to the Opera, doubtless that I
might be a witness to the insult he meant to offer you.”

“With Albert.”

“What shall I do with Albert? As certainly, Maximilian, as I now press
your hand, I shall kill him before ten o’clock tomorrow morning.”
Morrel, in his turn, took Monte Cristo’s hand in both of his, and he
shuddered to feel how cold and steady it was.

Morrel saw it was useless to say more, and refrained. The curtain, which
had risen at the close of the scene with Albert, again fell, and a rap
was heard at the door.

“Sir,” said M. Beauchamp, “Albert was wrong, I acknowledge, to betray so
much anger, and I come, on my own account, to apologize for him. And
having done so, entirely on my own account, be it understood, I would
add that I believe you too gentlemanly to refuse giving him some
explanation concerning your connection with Yanina. Then I will add two
words about the young Greek girl.”

“Very well, sir,” said Monte Cristo. “Now all that is settled, do let me
see the performance, and tell your friend Albert not to come any more
this evening; he will hurt himself with all his ill-chosen barbarisms:
let him go home and go to sleep.”

“But, Morrel, Albert is your friend?”

“It is astonishing,” said he. “Look, Emmanuel.” Then turning towards
Monte Cristo, “Count,” said he, “in the name of all that is dear to you,
I entreat you not to kill Albert!—the unhappy youth has a mother.”

“The only chance for Albert’s safety, then, will arise from your
emotion.”

“Because,” said Debray, “Albert sent this morning to request us to
come.” Beauchamp and Château-Renaud exchanged looks of astonishment. “I
think I understand his reason,” said Morrel.

“But, after all these arrangements, he does not come himself,” said
Château-Renaud. “Albert is ten minutes after time.”

Meanwhile Albert had arrived within ten paces of the group formed by the
five young men. He jumped from his horse, threw the bridle on his
servant’s arms, and joined them. He was pale, and his eyes were red and
swollen; it was evident that he had not slept. A shade of melancholy
gravity overspread his countenance, which was not natural to him.

“Stop, gentlemen,” said Albert; “I have two words to say to the Count of
Monte Cristo.”

Albert’s witnesses looked at each other. Franz and Debray exchanged some
words in a whisper, and Morrel, rejoiced at this unexpected incident,
went to fetch the count, who was walking in a retired path with
Emmanuel.

The count advanced, accompanied by Maximilian and Emmanuel. His calm and
serene look formed a singular contrast to Albert’s grief-stricken face,
who approached also, followed by the other four young men.

When at three paces distant from each other, Albert and the count
stopped.

“Approach, gentlemen,” said Albert; “I wish you not to lose one word of
what I am about to have the honor of saying to the Count of Monte
Cristo, for it must be repeated by you to all who will listen to it,
strange as it may appear to you.”

“Sir,” said Albert, at first with a tremulous voice, but which gradually
became firmer, “I reproached you with exposing the conduct of M. de
Morcerf in Epirus, for guilty as I knew he was, I thought you had no
right to punish him; but I have since learned that you had that right.
It is not Fernand Mondego’s treachery towards Ali Pasha which induces me
so readily to excuse you, but the treachery of the fisherman Fernand
towards you, and the almost unheard-of miseries which were its
consequences; and I say, and proclaim it publicly, that you were
justified in revenging yourself on my father, and I, his son, thank you
for not using greater severity.”

Had a thunderbolt fallen in the midst of the spectators of this
unexpected scene, it would not have surprised them more than did
Albert’s declaration. As for Monte Cristo, his eyes slowly rose towards
heaven with an expression of infinite gratitude. He could not understand
how Albert’s fiery nature, of which he had seen so much among the Roman
bandits, had suddenly stooped to this humiliation. He recognized the
influence of Mercédès, and saw why her noble heart had not opposed the
sacrifice she knew beforehand would be useless.

“Now, sir,” said Albert, “if you think my apology sufficient, pray give
me your hand. Next to the merit of infallibility which you appear to
possess, I rank that of candidly acknowledging a fault. But this
confession concerns me only. I acted well as a man, but you have acted
better than man. An angel alone could have saved one of us from
death—that angel came from heaven, if not to make us friends (which,
alas, fatality renders impossible), at least to make us esteem each
other.”

Monte Cristo, with moistened eye, heaving breast, and lips half open,
extended to Albert a hand which the latter pressed with a sentiment
resembling respectful fear.

“In truth, what Albert has just done is either very despicable or very
noble,” replied the baron.

As for Monte Cristo, his headcwas bent down, his arms were powerless.
Bowing under the weight of twenty-four years’ reminiscences, he thought
not of Albert, of Beauchamp, of Château-Renaud, or of any of that group;
but he thought of that courageous woman who had come to plead for her
son’s life, to whom he had offered his, and who had now saved it by the
revelation of a dreadful family secret, capable of destroying forever in
that young man’s heart every feeling of filial piety.

The Count of Monte Cristo bowed to the five young men with a melancholy
and dignified smile, and got into his carriage with Maximilian and
Emmanuel. Albert, Beauchamp, and Château-Renaud remained alone. Albert
looked at his two friends, not timidly, but in a way that appeared to
ask their opinion of what he had just done.

Albert remained silent and wrapped in thought. Château-Renaud contented
himself with tapping his boot with his flexible cane.

“Gentlemen,” interrupted Albert, “I think you did not understand that
something very serious had passed between M. de Monte Cristo and
myself.”

“Thank you, gentlemen,” replied Albert, with a smile of indifference; “I
shall follow your advice—not because you give it, but because I had
before intended to quit France. I thank you equally for the service you
have rendered me in being my seconds. It is deeply engraved on my heart,
and, after what you have just said, I remember that only.”

“Good-bye, Albert,” said Beauchamp suddenly, carelessly extending his
hand to the young man. The latter did not appear to arouse from his
lethargy; in fact, he did not notice the offered hand.

Albert’s lips scarcely whispered “Good-bye,” but his look was more
explicit; it expressed a whole poem of restrained anger, proud disdain,
and generous indignation. He preserved his melancholy and motionless
position for some time after his two friends had regained their
carriage; then suddenly unfastening his horse from the little tree to
which his servant had tied it, he mounted and galloped off in the
direction of Paris.

In a quarter of an hour he was entering the house in the Rue du Helder.
As he alighted, he thought he saw his father’s pale face behind the
curtain of the count’s bedroom. Albert turned away his head with a sigh,
and went to his own apartments. He cast one lingering look on all the
luxuries which had rendered life so easy and so happy since his infancy;
he looked at the pictures, whose faces seemed to smile, and the
landscapes, which appeared painted in brighter colors. Then he took away
his mother’s portrait, with its oaken frame, leaving the gilt frame from
which he took it black and empty. Then he arranged all his beautiful
Turkish arms, his fine English guns, his Japanese china, his cups
mounted in silver, his artistic bronzes by Feuchères or Barye; examined
the cupboards, and placed the key in each; threw into a drawer of his
secretaire, which he left open, all the pocket-money he had about him,
and with it the thousand fancy jewels from his vases and his jewel-
boxes; then he made an exact inventory of everything, and placed it in
the most conspicuous part of the table, after putting aside the books
and papers which had collected there.

“Well!” said Albert.

“It is probable,” said Albert.

The valet bowed and retired, and Albert returned to his inventory. As he
was finishing this work, the sound of horses prancing in the yard, and
the wheels of a carriage shaking his window, attracted his attention. He
approached the window, and saw his father get into it, and drive away.
The door was scarcely closed when Albert bent his steps to his mother’s
room; and, no one being there to announce him, he advanced to her
bedchamber, and distressed by what he saw and guessed, stopped for one
moment at the door.

As if the same idea had animated these two beings, Mercédès was doing
the same in her apartments that he had just done in his. Everything was
in order,—laces, dresses, jewels, linen, money, all were arranged in the
drawers, and the countess was carefully collecting the keys. Albert saw
all these preparations and understood them, and exclaiming, “My mother!”
he threw his arms around her neck.

The artist who could have depicted the expression of these two
countenances would certainly have made of them a beautiful picture. All
these proofs of an energetic resolution, which Albert did not fear on
his own account, alarmed him for his mother. “What are you doing?” asked
he.

“Oh, my mother!” exclaimed Albert, so overcome he could scarcely speak;
“it is not the same with you and me—you cannot have made the same
resolution I have, for I have come to warn you that I bid adieu to your
house, and—and to you.”

“Mother,” said Albert with firmness. “I cannot make you share the fate I
have planned for myself. I must live henceforth without rank and
fortune, and to begin this hard apprenticeship I must borrow from a
friend the loaf I shall eat until I have earned one. So, my dear mother,
I am going at once to ask Franz to lend me the small sum I shall require
to supply my present wants.”

“But not mine, mother,” replied Albert. “I am young and strong; I
believe I am courageous, and since yesterday I have learned the power of
will. Alas, my dear mother, some have suffered so much, and yet live,
and have raised a new fortune on the ruin of all the promises of
happiness which heaven had made them—on the fragments of all the hope
which God had given them! I have seen that, mother; I know that from the
gulf in which their enemies have plunged them they have risen with so
much vigor and glory that in their turn they have ruled their former
conquerors, and have punished them. No, mother; from this moment I have
done with the past, and accept nothing from it—not even a name, because
you can understand that your son cannot bear the name of a man who ought
to blush for it before another.”

“Albert, my child,” said Mercédès, “if I had a stronger heart, that is
the counsel I would have given you; your conscience has spoken when my
voice became too weak; listen to its dictates. You had friends, Albert;
break off their acquaintance. But do not despair; you have life before
you, my dear Albert, for you are yet scarcely twenty-two years old; and
as a pure heart like yours wants a spotless name, take my father’s—it
was Herrera. I am sure, my dear Albert, whatever may be your career, you
will soon render that name illustrious. Then, my son, return to the
world still more brilliant because of your former sorrows; and if I am
wrong, still let me cherish these hopes, for I have no future to look
forward to. For me the grave opens when I pass the threshold of this
house.”

Albert ran to fetch a carriage. He recollected that there was a small
furnished house to let in the Rue des Saints-Pères, where his mother
would find a humble but decent lodging, and thither he intended
conducting the countess. As the carriage stopped at the door, and Albert
was alighting, a man approached and gave him a letter.

Albert recognized the bearer. “From the count,” said Bertuccio. Albert
took the letter, opened, and read it, then looked round for Bertuccio,
but he was gone.

“Albert,—While showing you that I have discovered your plans, I hope
also to convince you of my delicacy. You are free, you leave the count’s
house, and you take your mother to your home; but reflect, Albert, you
owe her more than your poor noble heart can pay her. Keep the struggle
for yourself, bear all the suffering, but spare her the trial of poverty
which must accompany your first efforts; for she deserves not even the
shadow of the misfortune which has this day fallen on her, and
Providence is not willing that the innocent should suffer for the
guilty. I know you are going to leave the Rue du Helder without taking
anything with you. Do not seek to know how I discovered it; I know
it—that is sufficient.

“Now, listen, Albert. Twenty-four years ago I returned, proud and
joyful, to my country. I had a betrothed, Albert, a lovely girl whom I
adored, and I was bringing to my betrothed a hundred and fifty louis,
painfully amassed by ceaseless toil. This money was for her; I destined
it for her, and, knowing the treachery of the sea I buried our treasure
in the little garden of the house my father lived in at Marseilles, on
the Allées de Meilhan. Your mother, Albert, knows that poor house well.
A short time since I passed through Marseilles, and went to see the old
place, which revived so many painful recollections; and in the evening I
took a spade and dug in the corner of the garden where I had concealed
my treasure. The iron box was there—no one had touched it—under a
beautiful fig-tree my father had planted the day I was born, which
overshadowed the spot. Well, Albert, this money, which was formerly
designed to promote the comfort and tranquillity of the woman I adored,
may now, through strange and painful circumstances, be devoted to the
same purpose.

“Oh, feel for me, who could offer millions to that poor woman, but who
return her only the piece of black bread forgotten under my poor roof
since the day I was torn from her I loved. You are a generous man,
Albert, but perhaps you may be blinded by pride or resentment; if you
refuse me, if you ask another for what I have a right to offer you, I
will say it is ungenerous of you to refuse the life of your mother at
the hands of a man whose father was allowed by your father to die in all
the horrors of poverty and despair.”

Albert stood pale and motionless to hear what his mother would decide
after she had finished reading this letter. Mercédès turned her eyes
with an ineffable look towards heaven.

“For Albert is brave,” resumed Morrel.

“It is well for Albert he is not in the army,” said Morrel.

“Come,” said the count mildly, “do not entertain the prejudices of
ordinary men, Morrel! Acknowledge, that if Albert is brave, he cannot be
a coward; he must then have had some reason for acting as he did this
morning, and confess that his conduct is more heroic than otherwise.”

We must explain this visit, which although expected by Monte Cristo, is
unexpected to our readers. While Mercédès, as we have said, was making a
similar inventory of her property to Albert’s, while she was arranging
her jewels, shutting her drawers, collecting her keys, to leave
everything in perfect order, she did not perceive a pale and sinister
face at a glass door which threw light into the passage, from which
everything could be both seen and heard. He who was thus looking,
without being heard or seen, probably heard and saw all that passed in
Madame de Morcerf’s apartments. From that glass door the pale-faced man
went to the count’s bedroom and raised with a constricted hand the
curtain of a window overlooking the courtyard. He remained there ten
minutes, motionless and dumb, listening to the beating of his own heart.
For him those ten minutes were very long. It was then Albert, returning
from his meeting with the count, perceived his father watching for his
arrival behind a curtain, and turned aside. The count’s eye expanded; he
knew Albert had insulted the count dreadfully, and that in every country
in the world such an insult would lead to a deadly duel. Albert returned
safely—then the count was revenged.

It was then, when the count could not see Albert, that he sent for his
servant, who he knew was authorized not to conceal anything from him.
Ten minutes afterwards, General Morcerf was seen on the steps in a black
coat with a military collar, black pantaloons, and black gloves. He had
apparently given previous orders, for as he reached the bottom step his
carriage came from the coach-house ready for him. The valet threw into
the carriage his military cloak, in which two swords were wrapped, and,
shutting the door, he took his seat by the side of the coachman. The
coachman stooped down for his orders.

“M. Albert de Morcerf is no coward!” said Monte Cristo.

“Sir,” replied Monte Cristo coldly, “I did not expect that you had come
here to relate to me your little family affairs. Go and tell M. Albert
that, and he may know what to answer you.”

“At any rate,” said she, “since I am to be married whether I will or
not, I ought to be thankful to Providence for having released me from my
engagement with M. Albert de Morcerf, or I should this day have been the
wife of a dishonored man.”

“It is true,” said the baroness, with that strange simplicity sometimes
met with among fashionable ladies, and of which plebeian intercourse can
never entirely deprive them,—“it is very true that had not the Morcerfs
hesitated, my daughter would have married Monsieur Albert. The general
depended much on it; he even came to force M. Danglars. We have had a
narrow escape.”

“But,” said Valentine, timidly, “does all the father’s shame revert upon
the son? Monsieur Albert appears to me quite innocent of the treason
charged against the general.”

“Excuse me,” said the implacable young girl, “Monsieur Albert claims and
well deserves his share. It appears that after having challenged M. de
Monte Cristo at the Opera yesterday, he apologized on the ground today.”

“Not for the countess, or for Albert,” said Monte Cristo; “a dead father
or husband is better than a dishonored one,—blood washes out shame.”

“Pity Albert also, Maximilian; for believe me he is the worthy son of
the countess. But let us return to yourself. You have hastened to me—can
I have the happiness of being useful to you?”

The apartment on the first floor of the house in the Rue Saint-Germain-
des-Prés, where Albert de Morcerf had selected a home for his mother,
was let to a very mysterious person. This was a man whose face the
concierge himself had never seen, for in the winter his chin was buried
in one of the large red handkerchiefs worn by gentlemen’s coachmen on a
cold night, and in the summer he made a point of always blowing his nose
just as he approached the door. Contrary to custom, this gentleman had
not been watched, for as the report ran that he was a person of high
rank, and one who would allow no impertinent interference, his incognito
was strictly respected.

Mercédès and Albert were in that room.

Madame de Morcerf had lived there since leaving her house; the continual
silence of the spot oppressed her; still, seeing that Albert continually
watched her countenance to judge the state of her feelings, she
constrained herself to assume a monotonous smile of the lips alone,
which, contrasted with the sweet and beaming expression that usually
shone from her eyes, seemed like “moonlight on a statue,”—yielding light
without warmth.

Albert, too, was ill at ease; the remains of luxury prevented him from
sinking into his actual position. If he wished to go out without gloves,
his hands appeared too white; if he wished to walk through the town, his
boots seemed too highly polished. Yet these two noble and intelligent
creatures, united by the indissoluble ties of maternal and filial love,
had succeeded in tacitly understanding one another, and economizing
their stores, and Albert had been able to tell his mother without
extorting a change of countenance:

“Mother,” exclaimed Albert, just as Madame Danglars was descending the
stairs, “let us reckon our riches, if you please; I want capital to
build my plans upon.”

“I think so,” answered Albert in a firm tone. “We will accept them the
more readily, since we have them not here; you know they are buried in
the garden of the little house in the Allées de Meilhan, at Marseilles.
With 200 francs we can reach Marseilles.”

“With 200 francs?—are you sure, Albert?”

Albert then took a pen, and wrote:

Frs. Coupé, thirty-five francs.............................. 35. From
Châlons to Lyons you will go on by the steamboat.. 6. From Lyons to
Avignon (still by steamboat)............. 16. From Avignon to
Marseilles, seven francs............... 7. Expenses on the road, about
fifty francs............... 50.
Total................................................. 114 frs. “Let us
put down 120,” added Albert, smiling. “You see I am generous, am I not,
mother?”

And Albert took out of a little pocket-book with golden clasps, a
remnant of his old fancies, or perhaps a tender souvenir from one of the
mysterious and veiled ladies who used to knock at his little
door,—Albert took out of this pocket-book a note of 1,000 francs.

“Listen to me, mother, and do not yield too much to agitation.” And
Albert, rising, kissed his mother on both cheeks, then stood looking at
her. “You cannot imagine, mother, how beautiful I think you!” said the
young man, impressed with a profound feeling of filial love. “You are,
indeed, the most beautiful and most noble woman I ever saw!”

“Ah, just so,” said Albert; “here begins the trial. Do you know the
decision we have come to, mother?”

“Yes, if I am killed,” said Albert, laughing. “But I assure you, mother,
I have a strong intention of defending my person, and I never felt half
so strong an inclination to live as I do now.”

“Well, now you understand, mother!” continued Albert; “here are more
than 4,000 francs settled on you; upon these you can live at least two
years.”

These words were uttered inso mournful a tone that their real meaning
did not escape Albert; he felt his heart beat, and taking his mother’s
hand within his own he said, tenderly:

“I shall live!—then you will not leave me, Albert?”

“Mother, I must go,” said Albert in a firm, calm voice; “you love me too
well to wish me to remain useless and idle with you; besides, I have
signed.”

“Yes, let us strive, for you ought to live, and to be happy, Albert.”

“Well, be it so—let us part,” said Mercédès, folding around her
shoulders the only shawl she had taken away, and which accidentally
happened to be a valuable black cashmere. Albert gathered up his papers
hastily, rang the bell to pay the thirty francs he owed to the landlord,
and offering his arm to his mother, they descended the stairs.

Someone was walking down before them, and this person, hearing the
rustling of a silk dress, turned around. “Debray!” muttered Albert.

“Pardon me,” he added with a smile, “I leave you, Albert.” Albert
understood his thoughts.

“Believe me, dear Albert,” he said, with all the emotion he was capable
of feeling,—“believe me, I feel deeply for your misfortunes, and if in
any way I can serve you, I am yours.”

“Thank you, sir,” said Albert, smiling. “In the midst of our
misfortunes, we are still rich enough not to require assistance from
anyone. We are leaving Paris, and when our journey is paid, we shall
have 5,000 francs left.”

A man was hidden in Lafitte’s banking-house, behind one of the little
arched windows which are placed above each desk; he saw Mercédès enter
the diligence, and he also saw Albert withdraw. Then he passed his hand
across his forehead, which was clouded with doubt.

“Oh, heavens!” exclaimed Morrel, “I do not deceive myself—that young man
who is waving his hat, that youth in the uniform of a lieutenant, is
Albert de Morcerf!”

“Nothing shall be done without the full approbation of Albert de
Morcerf. I will make myself acquainted with his intentions and will
submit to them. But if he be willing to accept my offers, will you
oppose them?”

His hair stood on end. He remembered those interesting stories, so
little believed in Paris, respecting Roman bandits; he remembered the
adventures that Albert de Morcerf had related when it was intended that
he should marry Mademoiselle Eugénie. “They are robbers, perhaps,” he
muttered.

From their beds of dried leaves or wolf-skins at the back of the chamber
now arose the companions of the man who had been found by Albert de
Morcerf reading Cæsar’s Commentaries, and by Danglars studying the Life
of Alexander. The banker uttered a groan and followed his guide; he
neither supplicated nor exclaimed. He no longer possessed strength,
will, power, or feeling; he followed where they led him. At length he
found himself at the foot of a staircase, and he mechanically lifted his
foot five or six times. Then a low door was opened before him, and
bending his head to avoid striking his forehead he entered a small room
cut out of the rock. The cell was clean, though empty, and dry, though
situated at an immeasurable distance under the earth. A bed of dried
grass covered with goat-skins was placed in one corner. Danglars
brightened up on beholding it, fancying that it gave some promise of
safety.

Danglars, too, had recognized the bandit, whose existence he would not
believe when Albert de Morcerf mentioned him in Paris; and not only did
he recognize him, but the cell in which Albert had been confined, and
which was probably kept for the accommodation of strangers. These
recollections were dwelt upon with some pleasure by Danglars, and
restored him to some degree of tranquillity. Since the bandits had not
despatched him at once, he felt that they would not kill him at all.
They had arrested him for the purpose of robbery, and as he had only a
few louis about him, he doubted not he would be ransomed.

“Yes, yes,” he murmured, “I am in the hands of the brigands of whom
Albert de Morcerf spoke.” His first idea was to breathe, that he might
know whether he was wounded. He borrowed this from Don Quixote, the only
book he had ever read, but which he still slightly remembered.

