“Now, if you will come on board, M. Morrel,” said Dantès, observing the
owner’s impatience, “here is your supercargo, M. Danglars, coming out of
his cabin, who will furnish you with every particular. As for me, I must
look after the anchoring, and dress the ship in mourning.”

The owner did not wait for a second invitation. He seized a rope which
Dantès flung to him, and with an activity that would have done credit to
a sailor, climbed up the side of the ship, while the young man, going to
his task, left the conversation to Danglars, who now came towards the
owner. He was a man of twenty-five or twenty-six years of age, of
unprepossessing countenance, obsequious to his superiors, insolent to
his subordinates; and this, in addition to his position as responsible
agent on board, which is always obnoxious to the sailors, made him as
much disliked by the crew as Edmond Dantès was beloved by them.

“Well, M. Morrel,” said Danglars, “you have heard of the misfortune that
has befallen us?”

“And a first-rate seaman, one who had seen long and honorable service,
as became a man charged with the interests of a house so important as
that of Morrel & Son,” replied Danglars.

“But,” replied the owner, glancing after Dantès, who was watching the
anchoring of his vessel, “it seems to me that a sailor needs not be so
old as you say, Danglars, to understand his business, for our friend
Edmond seems to understand it thoroughly, and not to require instruction
from anyone.”

“Yes,” said Danglars, darting at Edmond a look gleaming with hate. “Yes,
he is young, and youth is invariably self-confident. Scarcely was the
captain’s breath out of his body when he assumed the command without
consulting anyone, and he caused us to lose a day and a half at the
Island of Elba, instead of making for Marseilles direct.”

“You see,” said Danglars, “he fancies himself captain already, upon my
word.”

A cloud passed over Danglars’ brow.

Danglars retreated a step or two. “I wished to inquire why you stopped
at the Island of Elba?”

“How could that bring me into trouble, sir?” asked Dantès; “for I did
not even know of what I was the bearer; and the emperor merely made such
inquiries as he would of the first comer. But, pardon me, here are the
health officers and the customs inspectors coming alongside.” And the
young man went to the gangway. As he departed, Danglars approached, and
said,—

“Yes, most satisfactory, my dear Danglars.”

“Of what packet are you speaking, Danglars?”

Danglars turned very red.

Danglars reflected for a moment. “Then, M. Morrel, I beg of you,” said
he, “not to say a word to Dantès on the subject. I may have been
mistaken.”

At this moment the young man returned; Danglars withdrew.

“No, thank you; I shall remain and look over the accounts with Danglars.
Have you been satisfied with him this voyage?”

“But tell me, Dantès, if you had command of the Pharaon should you be
glad to see Danglars remain?”

The shipowner, smiling, followed him with his eyes until he saw him
spring out on the quay and disappear in the midst of the throng, which
from five o’clock in the morning until nine o’clock at night, swarms in
the famous street of La Canebière,—a street of which the modern Phocéens
are so proud that they say with all the gravity in the world, and with
that accent which gives so much character to what is said, “If Paris had
La Canebière, Paris would be a second Marseilles.” On turning round the
owner saw Danglars behind him, apparently awaiting orders, but in
reality also watching the young sailor,—but there was a great difference
in the expression of the two men who thus followed the movements of
Edmond Dantès.

We will leave Danglars struggling with the demon of hatred, and
endeavoring to insinuate in the ear of the shipowner some evil
suspicions against his comrade, and follow Dantès, who, after having
traversed La Canebière, took the Rue de Noailles, and entering a small
house, on the left of the Allées de Meilhan, rapidly ascended four
flights of a dark staircase, holding the baluster with one hand, while
with the other he repressed the beatings of his heart, and paused before
a half-open door, from which he could see the whole of a small room.

“What’s the use of mentioning that? What is done is done. Let us talk of
your happy return, my boy. I had gone on the quay to match a piece of
mulberry cloth, when I met friend Danglars. ‘You at Marseilles?’—‘Yes,’
says he.

“‘Why, with his father, no doubt,’ replied Danglars. And so I came,”
added Caderousse, “as fast as I could to have the pleasure of shaking
hands with a friend.”

Caderousse lingered for a moment, then taking leave of old Dantès, he
went downstairs to rejoin Danglars, who awaited him at the corner of the
Rue Senac.

“Well,” said Danglars, “did you see him?”

“Indeed!” said Danglars, “he is in too much hurry, it appears to me.”

“Pooh!” said Danglars, “he is not one yet.”

“If we choose,” replied Danglars, “he will remain what he is; and
perhaps become even less than he is.”

“Of course,” replied Danglars; and going quickly to the designated
place, they called for a bottle of wine, and two glasses.

The young man stopped suddenly, looked around him, and perceived
Caderousse sitting at table with Danglars, under an arbor.

“Particularly when they have still a full bottle before them,” added
Danglars. Fernand looked at them both with a stupefied air, but did not
say a word.

“He seems besotted,” said Danglars, pushing Caderousse with his knee.
“Are we mistaken, and is Dantès triumphant in spite of all we have
believed?”

“Bah!” said Danglars, “a lad of his make was not born to be unhappy in
love. You are laughing at him, Caderousse.”

“Ah, you see, Danglars,” said Caderousse, winking at his friend, “this
is how it is; Fernand, whom you see here, is a good and brave Catalan,
one of the best fishermen in Marseilles, and he is in love with a very
fine girl, named Mercédès; but it appears, unfortunately, that the fine
girl is in love with the mate of the Pharaon; and as the Pharaon arrived
today—why, you understand!”

“No; I do not understand,” said Danglars.

“Poor fellow!” remarked Danglars, affecting to pity the young man from
the bottom of his heart. “Why, you see, he did not expect to see Dantès
return so suddenly—he thought he was dead, perhaps; or perchance
faithless! These things always come on us more severely when they come
suddenly.”

“Ah, ma foi, under any circumstances!” said Caderousse, who drank as he
spoke, and on whom the fumes of the wine began to take effect,—“under
any circumstances Fernand is not the only person put out by the
fortunate arrival of Dantès; is he, Danglars?”

“Well, never mind,” answered Caderousse, pouring out a glass of wine for
Fernand, and filling his own for the eighth or ninth time, while
Danglars had merely sipped his. “Never mind—in the meantime he marries
Mercédès—the lovely Mercédès—at least he returns to do that.”

During this time Danglars fixed his piercing glance on the young man, on
whose heart Caderousse’s words fell like molten lead.

“No, but it will be,” said Caderousse, “as surely as Dantès will be
captain of the Pharaon—eh, Danglars?”

Danglars shuddered at this unexpected attack, and turned to Caderousse,
whose countenance he scrutinized, to try and detect whether the blow was
premeditated; but he read nothing but envy in a countenance already
rendered brutal and stupid by drunkenness.

Danglars did not lose one pang that Fernand endured.

“Hold your tongue, will you?” said Danglars, pretending to restrain
Caderousse, who, with the tenacity of drunkards, leaned out of the
arbor. “Try to stand upright, and let the lovers make love without
interruption. See, look at Fernand, and follow his example; he is well-
behaved!”

Fernand, probably excited beyond bearing, pricked by Danglars, as the
bull is by the bandilleros, was about to rush out; for he had risen from
his seat, and seemed to be collecting himself to dash headlong upon his
rival, when Mercédès, smiling and graceful, lifted up her lovely head,
and looked at them with her clear and bright eyes. At this Fernand
recollected her threat of dying if Edmond died, and dropped again
heavily on his seat. Danglars looked at the two men, one after the
other, the one brutalized by liquor, the other overwhelmed with love.

“I shall get nothing from these fools,” he muttered; “and I am very much
afraid of being here between a drunkard and a coward. Here’s an envious
fellow making himself boozy on wine when he ought to be nursing his
wrath, and here is a fool who sees the woman he loves stolen from under
his nose and takes on like a big baby. Yet this Catalan has eyes that
glisten like those of the vengeful Spaniards, Sicilians, and Calabrians,
and the other has fists big enough to crush an ox at one blow.
Unquestionably, Edmond’s star is in the ascendant, and he will marry the
splendid girl—he will be captain, too, and laugh at us all, unless”—a
sinister smile passed over Danglars’ lips—“unless I take a hand in the
affair,” he added.

“So, then, the wedding is to take place immediately, M. Dantès,” said
Danglars, bowing to the young couple.

“As soon as possible, M. Danglars; today all preliminaries will be
arranged at my father’s, and tomorrow, or next day at latest, the
wedding festival here at La Réserve. My friends will be there, I hope;
that is to say, you are invited, M. Danglars, and you, Caderousse.”

“Danglars,” said Edmond, smiling, “I will say to you as Mercédès said
just now to Caderousse, ‘Do not give me a title which does not belong to
me’; that may bring me bad luck.”

“Your pardon,” replied Danglars, “I merely said you seemed in a hurry,
and we have lots of time; the Pharaon cannot be under weigh again in
less than three months.”

“We are always in a hurry to be happy, M. Danglars; for when we have
suffered a long time, we have great difficulty in believing in good
fortune. But it is not selfishness alone that makes me thus in haste; I
must go to Paris.”

“Not of my own; the last commission of poor Captain Leclere; you know to
what I allude, Danglars—it is sacred. Besides, I shall only take the
time to go and return.”

“Yes, yes, I understand,” said Danglars, and then in a low tone, he
added, “To Paris, no doubt to deliver the letter which the grand marshal
gave him. Ah, this letter gives me an idea—a capital idea! Ah; Dantès,
my friend, you are not yet registered number one on board the good ship
Pharaon;” then turning towards Edmond, who was walking away, “A pleasant
journey,” he cried.

Danglars followed Edmond and Mercédès with his eyes until the two lovers
disappeared behind one of the angles of Fort Saint Nicolas; then,
turning round, he perceived Fernand, who had fallen, pale and trembling,
into his chair, while Caderousse stammered out the words of a drinking-
song.

“Well, my dear sir,” said Danglars to Fernand, “here is a marriage which
does not appear to make everybody happy.”

“Idiot!” muttered Danglars; “whether she kill herself or not, what
matter, provided Dantès is not captain?”

“Come,” said Danglars, “you appear to me a good sort of fellow, and hang
me, I should like to help you, but——”

“My dear fellow,” replied Danglars, “you are three parts drunk; finish
the bottle, and you will be completely so. Drink then, and do not meddle
with what we are discussing, for that requires all one’s wit and cool
judgment.”

“You talk like a noodle, my friend,” said Caderousse; “and here is
Danglars, who is a wide-awake, clever, deep fellow, who will prove to
you that you are wrong. Prove it, Danglars. I have answered for you. Say
there is no need why Dantès should die; it would, indeed, be a pity he
should. Dantès is a good fellow; I like Dantès. Dantès, your health.”

Fernand rose impatiently. “Let him run on,” said Danglars, restraining
the young man; “drunk as he is, he is not much out in what he says.
Absence severs as well as death, and if the walls of a prison were
between Edmond and Mercédès they would be as effectually separated as if
he lay under a tombstone.”

“Hold your tongue!” said Danglars.

Danglars saw in the muddled look of the tailor the progress of his
intoxication, and turning towards Fernand, said, “Well, you understand
there is no need to kill him.”

“I! motives of hatred against Dantès? None, on my word! I saw you were
unhappy, and your unhappiness interested me; that’s all; but since you
believe I act for my own account, adieu, my dear friend, get out of the
affair as best you may;” and Danglars rose as if he meant to depart.

“And who has said a word about killing him, muddlehead?” replied
Danglars. “We were merely joking; drink to his health,” he added,
filling Caderousse’s glass, “and do not interfere with us.”

“Have you not hit upon any?” asked Danglars.

“True,” replied Danglars; “the French have the superiority over the
Spaniards, that the Spaniards ruminate, while the French invent.”

“Waiter,” said Danglars, “pen, ink, and paper.”

“The fellow is not so drunk as he appears to be,” said Danglars. “Give
him some more wine, Fernand.” Fernand filled Caderousse’s glass, who,
like the confirmed toper he was, lifted his hand from the paper and
seized the glass.

“Well, then, I should say, for instance,” resumed Danglars, “that if
after a voyage such as Dantès has just made, in which he touched at the
Island of Elba, someone were to denounce him to the king’s procureur as
a Bonapartist agent——”

“No, no,” continued Danglars; “if we resolve on such a step, it would be
much better to take, as I now do, this pen, dip it into this ink, and
write with the left hand (that the writing may not be recognized) the
denunciation we propose.” And Danglars, uniting practice with theory,
wrote with his left hand, and in a writing reversed from his usual
style, and totally unlike it, the following lines, which he handed to
Fernand, and which Fernand read in an undertone:

“Very good,” resumed Danglars; “now your revenge looks like common
sense, for in no way can it revert to yourself, and the matter will thus
work its own way; there is nothing to do now but fold the letter as I am
doing, and write upon it, ‘To the king’s attorney,’ and that’s all
settled.” And Danglars wrote the address as he spoke.

“Yes,” said Danglars, taking it from beyond his reach; “and as what I
say and do is merely in jest, and I, amongst the first and foremost,
should be sorry if anything happened to Dantès—the worthy Dantès—look
here!” And taking the letter, he squeezed it up in his hands and threw
it into a corner of the arbor.

“And who thinks of using him ill? Certainly neither I nor Fernand,” said
Danglars, rising and looking at the young man, who still remained
seated, but whose eye was fixed on the denunciatory sheet of paper flung
into the corner.

“You have had too much already, drunkard,” said Danglars; “and if you
continue, you will be compelled to sleep here, because unable to stand
on your legs.”

“Done!” said Danglars, “I’ll take your bet; but tomorrow—today it is
time to return. Give me your arm, and let us go.”

“What do you mean? you will not? Well, just as you like, my prince;
there’s liberty for all the world. Come along, Danglars, and let the
young gentleman return to the Catalans if he chooses.”

Danglars took advantage of Caderousse’s temper at the moment, to take
him off towards Marseilles by the Porte Saint-Victor, staggering as he
went.

When they had advanced about twenty yards, Danglars looked back and saw
Fernand stoop, pick up the crumpled paper, and putting it into his
pocket then rush out of the arbor towards Pillon.

“Oh, you don’t see straight,” said Danglars; “he’s gone right by the
road to the Vieilles Infirmeries.”

“Come, come,” said Danglars to himself, “now the thing is at work and it
will effect its purpose unassisted.”

Danglars, however, who now made his appearance, accompanied by
Caderousse, effectually confirmed the report, stating that he had
recently conversed with M. Morrel, who had himself assured him of his
intention to dine at La Réserve.

With the entrance of M. Morrel, Danglars and Caderousse were despatched
in search of the bridegroom to convey to him the intelligence of the
arrival of the important personage whose coming had created such a
lively sensation, and to beseech him to make haste.

Danglars and Caderousse set off upon their errand at full speed; but ere
they had gone many steps they perceived a group advancing towards them,
composed of the betrothed pair, a party of young girls in attendance on
the bride, by whose side walked Dantès’ father; the whole brought up by
Fernand, whose lips wore their usual sinister smile.

Having acquitted themselves of their errand, and exchanged a hearty
shake of the hand with Edmond, Danglars and Caderousse took their places
beside Fernand and old Dantès,—the latter of whom attracted universal
notice.

As Danglars approached the disappointed lover, he cast on him a look of
deep meaning, while Fernand, as he slowly paced behind the happy pair,
who seemed, in their own unmixed content, to have entirely forgotten
that such a being as himself existed, was pale and abstracted;
occasionally, however, a deep flush would overspread his countenance,
and a nervous contraction distort his features, while, with an agitated
and restless gaze, he would glance in the direction of Marseilles, like
one who either anticipated or foresaw some great and important event.

During this time, Dantès, at the opposite side of the table, had been
occupied in similarly placing his most honored guests. M. Morrel was
seated at his right hand, Danglars at his left; while, at a sign from
Edmond, the rest of the company ranged themselves as they found it most
agreeable.

Danglars looked towards Fernand, whose excitable nature received and
betrayed each fresh impression.

“In an hour?” inquired Danglars, turning pale. “How is that, my friend?”

“But,” asked Danglars, in a timid tone, “how did you manage about the
other formalities—the contract—the settlement?”

“So that what we presumed to be merely the betrothal feast turns out to
be the actual wedding dinner!” said Danglars.

Fernand’s paleness appeared to have communicated itself to Danglars. As
for Fernand himself, he seemed to be enduring the tortures of the
damned; unable to rest, he was among the first to quit the table, and,
as though seeking to avoid the hilarious mirth that rose in such
deafening sounds, he continued, in utter silence, to pace the farther
end of the salon.

Caderousse approached him just as Danglars, whom Fernand seemed most
anxious to avoid, had joined him in a corner of the room.

“Oh, there was no harm meant,” answered Danglars; “at first I certainly
did feel somewhat uneasy as to what Fernand might be tempted to do; but
when I saw how completely he had mastered his feelings, even so far as
to become one of his rival’s attendants, I knew there was no further
cause for apprehension.” Caderousse looked full at Fernand—he was
ghastly pale.

“Certainly,” continued Danglars, “the sacrifice was no trifling one,
when the beauty of the bride is concerned. Upon my soul, that future
captain of mine is a lucky dog! Gad! I only wish he would let me take
his place.”

At this moment Danglars, who had been incessantly observing every change
in Fernand’s look and manner, saw him stagger and fall back, with an
almost convulsive spasm, against a seat placed near one of the open
windows. At the same instant his ear caught a sort of indistinct sound
on the stairs, followed by the measured tread of soldiery, with the
clanking of swords and military accoutrements; then came a hum and buzz
as of many voices, so as to deaden even the noisy mirth of the bridal
party, among whom a vague feeling of curiosity and apprehension quelled
every disposition to talk, and almost instantaneously the most deathlike
stillness prevailed.

“What is the meaning of all this?” inquired Caderousse, frowningly, of
Danglars, who had assumed an air of utter surprise.

“So, so,” said he, in a hoarse and choking voice, to Danglars, “this,
then, I suppose, is a part of the trick you were concerting yesterday?
All I can say is, that if it be so, ’tis an ill turn, and well deserves
to bring double evil on those who have projected it.”

“Nonsense,” returned Danglars, “I tell you again I have nothing whatever
to do with it; besides, you know very well that I tore the paper to
pieces.”

“How do I know?” replied Danglars; “gone, as every prudent man ought to
be, to look after his own affairs, most likely. Never mind where he is,
let you and I go and see what is to be done for our poor friends.”

“Oh, to be sure!” responded Danglars, who had now approached the group,
“nothing more than a mistake, I feel quite certain.”

“He is the cause of all this misery—I am quite sure of it,” whispered
Caderousse, who had never taken his eyes off Fernand, to Danglars.

“Surely,” answered Danglars, “one cannot be held responsible for every
chance arrow shot into the air.”

“What think you, Danglars,” said one of the party, turning towards him,
“of this event?”

“But how could he have done so without your knowledge, Danglars, since
you are the ship’s supercargo?”

“There, you see,” exclaimed Danglars. “Now the mischief is out; depend
upon it the custom-house people went rummaging about the ship in our
absence, and discovered poor Dantès’ hidden treasures.”

“Hope!” repeated Danglars.

“Ah, Danglars!” whispered Caderousse, “you have deceived me—the trick
you spoke of last night has been played; but I cannot suffer a poor old
man or an innocent girl to die of grief through your fault. I am
determined to tell them all about it.”

“Be silent, you simpleton!” cried Danglars, grasping him by the arm, “or
I will not answer even for your own safety. Who can tell whether Dantès
be innocent or guilty? The vessel did touch at Elba, where he quitted
it, and passed a whole day in the island. Now, should any letters or
other documents of a compromising character be found upon him, will it
not be taken for granted that all who uphold him are his accomplices?”

With the rapid instinct of selfishness, Caderousse readily perceived the
solidity of this mode of reasoning; he gazed, doubtfully, wistfully, on
Danglars, and then caution supplanted generosity.

“To be sure!” answered Danglars. “Let us wait, by all means. If he be
innocent, of course he will be set at liberty; if guilty, why, it is no
use involving ourselves in a conspiracy.”

“With all my heart!” replied Danglars, pleased to find the other so
tractable. “Let us take ourselves out of the way, and leave things for
the present to take their course.”

“Could you ever have credited such a thing, my dear Danglars?” asked M.
Morrel, as, on his return to the port for the purpose of gleaning fresh
tidings of Dantès, from M. de Villefort, the assistant procureur, he
overtook his supercargo and Caderousse. “Could you have believed such a
thing possible?”

“Why, you know I told you,” replied Danglars, “that I considered the
circumstance of his having anchored at the Island of Elba as a very
suspicious circumstance.”

“Certainly not!” returned Danglars. Then added in a low whisper, “You
understand that, on account of your uncle, M. Policar Morrel, who served
under the other government, and who does not altogether conceal what he
thinks on the subject, you are strongly suspected of regretting the
abdication of Napoleon. I should have feared to injure both Edmond and
yourself, had I divulged my own apprehensions to a soul. I am too well
aware that though a subordinate, like myself, is bound to acquaint the
shipowner with everything that occurs, there are many things he ought
most carefully to conceal from all else.”

“’Tis well, Danglars—’tis well!” replied M. Morrel. “You are a worthy
fellow; and I had already thought of your interests in the event of poor
Edmond having become captain of the Pharaon.”

“The hypocrite!” murmured Danglars.

“Oh,” replied Danglars, “since we cannot leave this port for the next
three months, let us hope that ere the expiration of that period Dantès
will be set at liberty.”

“I am entirely at your service, M. Morrel,” answered Danglars. “You know
that I am as capable of managing a ship as the most experienced captain
in the service; and it will be so far advantageous to you to accept my
services, that upon Edmond’s release from prison no further change will
be requisite on board the Pharaon than for Dantès and myself each to
resume our respective posts.”

“Thanks, Danglars—that will smooth over all difficulties. I fully
authorize you at once to assume the command of the Pharaon, and look
carefully to the unloading of her freight. Private misfortunes must
never be allowed to interfere with business.”

“Perhaps not,” replied Danglars; “but I hear that he is ambitious, and
that’s rather against him.”

“You see,” said Danglars, addressing Caderousse, “the turn things have
taken. Do you still feel any desire to stand up in his defence?”

“Still,” argued Caderousse, “I would give a great deal if nothing of the
kind had happened; or, at least, that I had had no hand in it. You will
see, Danglars, that it will turn out an unlucky job for both of us.”

“Amen!” responded Caderousse, waving his hand in token of adieu to
Danglars, and bending his steps towards the Allées de Meilhan, moving
his head to and fro, and muttering as he went, after the manner of one
whose mind was overcharged with one absorbing idea.

“So far, then,” said Danglars, mentally, “all has gone as I would have
it. I am, temporarily, commander of the Pharaon, with the certainty of
being permanently so, if that fool of a Caderousse can be persuaded to
hold his tongue. My only fear is the chance of Dantès being released.
But, there, he is in the hands of Justice; and,” added he with a smile,
“she will take her own.” So saying, he leaped into a boat, desiring to
be rowed on board the Pharaon, where M. Morrel had agreed to meet him.

Danglars alone was content and joyous—he had got rid of an enemy and
made his own situation on the Pharaon secure. Danglars was one of those
men born with a pen behind the ear, and an inkstand in place of a heart.
Everything with him was multiplication or subtraction. The life of a man
was to him of far less value than a numeral, especially when, by taking
it away, he could increase the sum total of his own desires. He went to
bed at his usual hour, and slept in peace.

Danglars comprehended the full extent of the wretched fate that
overwhelmed Dantès; and, when Napoleon returned to France, he, after the
manner of mediocre minds, termed the coincidence, a decree of
Providence. But when Napoleon returned to Paris, Danglars’ heart failed
him, and he lived in constant fear of Dantès’ return on a mission of
vengeance. He therefore informed M. Morrel of his wish to quit the sea,
and obtained a recommendation from him to a Spanish merchant, into whose
service he entered at the end of March, that is, ten or twelve days
after Napoleon’s return. He then left for Madrid, and was no more heard
of.

“Danglars.”

“It might, for the cabin door was open—and—stay; now I
recollect,—Danglars himself passed by just as Captain Leclere was giving
me the packet for the grand marshal.”

“Danglars, as well as the rest?”

“Danglars, as well as others.”

“How did Danglars usually write?”

“Then it is Danglars.”

“Wait a little. Pray, was Danglars acquainted with Fernand?”

“To have seen them both sitting at table together under an arbor at Père
Pamphile’s the evening before the day fixed for my wedding. They were in
earnest conversation. Danglars was joking in a friendly way, but Fernand
looked pale and agitated.”

It was fourteen years, day for day, since Dantès’ arrest. He was
nineteen when he entered the Château d’If; he was thirty-three when he
escaped. A sorrowful smile passed over his face; he asked himself what
had become of Mercédès, who must believe him dead. Then his eyes lighted
up with hatred as he thought of the three men who had caused him so long
and wretched a captivity. He renewed against Danglars, Fernand, and
Villefort the oath of implacable vengeance he had made in his dungeon.

“‘Another of the number,’” continued the abbé, without seeming to notice
the emotion of Caderousse, “‘is called Danglars; and the third, in spite
of being my rival, entertained a very sincere affection for me.’”

“That is true enough,” returned Caderousse. “You say truly, the gift of
poor Edmond was not meant for such traitors as Fernand and Danglars;
besides, what would it be to them? no more than a drop of water in the
ocean.”

“Why, did you not hear all we said?” inquired Caderousse. “It is a
beautiful diamond left by poor Edmond Dantès, to be sold, and the money
divided between his father, Mercédès, his betrothed bride, Fernand,
Danglars, and myself. The jewel is worth at least fifty thousand
francs.”

“Remember,” answered the abbé calmly, as he replaced the jewel and its
case in the pocket of his cassock, “it is your fault, not mine, that I
do so. You will have the goodness to furnish me with the address of both
Fernand and Danglars, in order that I may execute Edmond’s last wishes.”

“Two men jealous of him, sir; one from love, and the other from
ambition,—Fernand and Danglars.”

“It was Danglars who wrote the denunciation with his left hand, that his
writing might not be recognized, and Fernand who put it in the post.”

“Yes, sir, I was there, and very anxious to speak; but Danglars
restrained me. ‘If he should really be guilty,’ said he, ‘and did really
put in to the Island of Elba; if he is really charged with a letter for
the Bonapartist committee at Paris, and if they find this letter upon
him, those who have supported him will pass for his accomplices.’ I
confess I had my fears, in the state in which politics then were, and I
held my tongue. It was cowardly, I confess, but it was not criminal.”

“And it is thus heaven recompenses virtue, sir,” added Caderousse. “You
see, I, who never did a bad action but that I have told you of—am in
destitution, with my poor wife dying of fever before my very eyes, and I
unable to do anything in the world for her; I shall die of hunger, as
old Dantès did, while Fernand and Danglars are rolling in wealth.”

“What has become of Danglars, the instigator, and therefore the most
guilty?”

“What has become of him? Why, he left Marseilles, and was taken, on the
recommendation of M. Morrel, who did not know his crime, as cashier into
a Spanish bank. During the war with Spain he was employed in the
commissariat of the French army, and made a fortune; then with that
money he speculated in the funds, and trebled or quadrupled his capital;
and, having first married his banker’s daughter, who left him a widower,
he has married a second time, a widow, a Madame de Nargonne, daughter of
M. de Servieux, the king’s chamberlain, who is in high favor at court.
He is a millionaire, and they have made him a baron, and now he is the
Baron Danglars, with a fine residence in the Rue du Mont-Blanc, with ten
horses in his stables, six footmen in his antechamber, and I know not
how many millions in his strongbox.”

“Happy? Who can answer for that? Happiness or unhappiness is the secret
known but to one’s self and the walls—walls have ears but no tongue; but
if a large fortune produces happiness, Danglars is happy.”

“Fernand would have been court-martialed if Napoleon had remained on the
throne, but his action was rewarded by the Bourbons. He returned to
France with the epaulet of sub-lieutenant, and as the protection of the
general, who is in the highest favor, was accorded to him, he was a
captain in 1823, during the Spanish war—that is to say, at the time when
Danglars made his early speculations. Fernand was a Spaniard, and being
sent to Spain to ascertain the feeling of his fellow-countrymen, found
Danglars there, got on very intimate terms with him, won over the
support of the royalists at the capital and in the provinces, received
promises and made pledges on his own part, guided his regiment by paths
known to himself alone through the mountain gorges which were held by
the royalists, and, in fact, rendered such services in this brief
campaign that, after the taking of Trocadero, he was made colonel, and
received the title of count and the cross of an officer of the Legion of
Honor.”

“Why, when I found myself utterly destitute, I thought my old friends
would, perhaps, assist me. So I went to Danglars, who would not even
receive me. I called on Fernand, who sent me a hundred francs by his
valet-de-chambre.”

“No; I only know that some time after Edmond’s arrest, he married
Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran, and soon after left Marseilles; no doubt he
has been as lucky as the rest; no doubt he is as rich as Danglars, as
high in station as Fernand. I only, as you see, have remained poor,
wretched, and forgotten.”

As we have said, the inspector, from discretion, and that he might not
disturb the Abbé Faria’s pupil in his researches, had seated himself in
a corner, and was reading Le Drapeau Blanc. He did not see the
Englishman fold up and place in his pocket the accusation written by
Danglars under the arbor of La Réserve, and which had the postmark,
“Marseilles, 27th February, delivery 6 o’clock, P.M.”

On the 1st, Morrel returned; he was awaited by his family with extreme
anxiety, for from this journey to Paris they hoped great things. Morrel
had thought of Danglars, who was now immensely rich, and had lain under
great obligations to Morrel in former days, since to him it was owing
that Danglars entered the service of the Spanish banker, with whom he
had laid the foundations of his vast wealth. It was said at this moment
that Danglars was worth from six to eight millions of francs, and had
unlimited credit. Danglars, then, without taking a crown from his
pocket, could save Morrel; he had but to pass his word for a loan, and
Morrel was saved. Morrel had long thought of Danglars, but had kept away
from some instinctive motive, and had delayed as long as possible
availing himself of this last resource. And Morrel was right, for he
returned home crushed by the humiliation of a refusal.

“One by the post, Madame Danglars’ footman left the other.”

“Let Madame Danglars know that I accept the place she offers me in her
box. Wait; then, during the day, tell Rosa that when I leave the Opera I
will sup with her as she wishes. Take her six bottles of different
wine—Cyprus, sherry, and Malaga, and a barrel of Ostend oysters; get
them at Borel’s, and be sure you say they are for me.”

“Yes, he has not much to complain of; Bourges is the capital of Charles
VII. Do you not know that all Paris knew it yesterday, and the day
before it had already transpired on the Bourse, and M. Danglars (I do
not know by what means that man contrives to obtain intelligence as soon
as we do) made a million!”

“Ah, you do not know with what I am threatened. I shall hear this
morning that M. Danglars make a speech at the Chamber of Deputies, and
at his wife’s this evening I shall hear the tragedy of a peer of France.
The devil take the constitutional government, and since we had our
choice, as they say, at least, how could we choose that?”

“Do not run down M. Danglars’ speeches,” said Debray; “he votes for you,
for he belongs to the opposition.”

“My dear friend,” said Albert to Beauchamp, “it is plain that the
affairs of Spain are settled, for you are most desperately out of humor
this morning. Recollect that Parisian gossip has spoken of a marriage
between myself and Mlle. Eugénie Danglars; I cannot in conscience,
therefore, let you run down the speeches of a man who will one day say
to me, ‘Vicomte, you know I give my daughter two millions.’”

“No,” replied Morcerf, “my father is most anxious about it; and I hope,
ere long, to introduce you, if not to my wife, at least to my
betrothed—Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars.”

“Eugénie Danglars,” said Monte Cristo; “tell me, is not her father Baron
Danglars?”

“But,” continued Morcerf, “à propos of Danglars,—we have strangely
wandered from the subject. We were speaking of a suitable habitation for
the Count of Monte Cristo. Come, gentlemen, let us all propose some
place. Where shall we lodge this new guest in our great capital?”

“Bravo,” said Beauchamp to Albert; “I shall not go to the Chamber, but I
have something better to offer my readers than a speech of M. Danglars.”

“Your excellency, it is done already. I have been myself to the best
engraver of the Palais Royal, who did the plate in my presence. The
first card struck off was taken, according to your orders, to the Baron
Danglars, Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin, No. 7; the others are on the
mantle-piece of your excellency’s bedroom.”

“Then here is my master’s card, the Baron Danglars. You will take it to
the count, and say that, although in haste to attend the Chamber, my
master came out of his way to have the honor of calling upon him.”

“Well?” asked Danglars.

“Bless me,” murmured Baron Danglars, “this must surely be a prince
instead of a count by their styling him ‘excellency,’ and only venturing
to address him by the medium of his valet de chambre. However, it does
not signify; he has a letter of credit on me, so I must see him when he
requires his money.”

Then, throwing himself back in his carriage, Danglars called out to his
coachman, in a voice that might be heard across the road, “To the
Chamber of Deputies.”

Apprised in time of the visit paid him, Monte Cristo had, from behind
the blinds of his pavilion, as minutely observed the baron, by means of
an excellent lorgnette, as Danglars himself had scrutinized the house,
garden, and servants.

“His excellency is not, perhaps, aware that M. Danglars gave 16,000
francs for his horses?”

The count descended to the door of his mansion, and beheld his carriage
drawn by the very pair of horses he had so much admired in the morning
as the property of Danglars. As he passed them he said:

“To the residence of Baron Danglars, Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin.”

Danglars was engaged at that moment, presiding over a railroad
committee. But the meeting was nearly concluded when the name of his
visitor was announced. As the count’s title sounded on his ear he rose,
and addressing his colleagues, who were members of one or the other
Chamber, he said:

“Gentlemen, pardon me for leaving you so abruptly; but a most ridiculous
circumstance has occurred, which is this,—Thomson & French, the Roman
bankers, have sent to me a certain person calling himself the Count of
Monte Cristo, and have given him an unlimited credit with me. I confess
this is the drollest thing I have ever met with in the course of my
extensive foreign transactions, and you may readily suppose it has
greatly roused my curiosity. I took the trouble this morning to call on
the pretended count—if he were a real count he wouldn’t be so rich. But,
would you believe it, ‘He was not receiving.’ So the master of Monte
Cristo gives himself airs befitting a great millionaire or a capricious
beauty. I made inquiries, and found that the house in the Champs-Élysées
is his own property, and certainly it was very decently kept up. But,”
pursued Danglars with one of his sinister smiles, “an order for
unlimited credit calls for something like caution on the part of the
banker to whom that order is given. I am very anxious to see this man. I
suspect a hoax is intended, but the instigators of it little knew whom
they had to deal with. ‘They laugh best who laugh last!’”

The count turned round as he heard the entrance of Danglars into the
room. With a slight inclination of the head, Danglars signed to the
count to be seated, pointing significantly to a gilded armchair, covered
with white satin embroidered with gold. The count sat down.

“And I of speaking to Baron Danglars, chevalier of the Legion of Honor,
and member of the Chamber of Deputies?”

Danglars felt the irony and compressed his lips.

“Upon my word, monsieur,” said Danglars with affected carelessness, “I
attach no sort of value to such empty distinctions; but the fact is, I
was made baron, and also chevalier of the Legion of Honor, in return for
services rendered, but——”

“Why,” replied Danglars, “not entirely so; with the servants,—you
understand.”

Again Danglars bit his lips; he saw that he was no match for Monte
Cristo in an argument of this sort, and he therefore hastened to turn to
subjects more congenial.

“Yes,” said Danglars, “but I confess I didn’t quite comprehend its
meaning.”

“Why,” said Danglars, “in the letter—I believe I have it about me”—here
he felt in his breast-pocket—“yes, here it is. Well, this letter gives
the Count of Monte Cristo unlimited credit on our house.”

“Thomson & French are perfectly solvent,” replied Danglars, with an
almost mocking smile; “but the word unlimited, in financial affairs, is
so extremely vague.”

“Precisely what I was about to say,” cried Danglars. “Now what is vague
is doubtful; and it was a wise man who said, ‘when in doubt, keep out.’”

“Meaning to say,” rejoined Monte Cristo, “that however Thomson & French
may be inclined to commit acts of imprudence and folly, the Baron
Danglars is not disposed to follow their example.”

“Plainly enough; Messrs. Thomson & French set no bounds to their
engagements while those of M. Danglars have their limits; he is a wise
man, according to his own showing.”

Once more Danglars bit his lips. It was the second time he had been
worsted, and this time on his own ground. His forced politeness sat
awkwardly upon him, and approached almost to impertinence. Monte Cristo
on the contrary, preserved a graceful suavity of demeanor, aided by a
certain degree of simplicity he could assume at pleasure, and thus
possessed the advantage.

“Well, sir,” resumed Danglars, after a brief silence, “I will endeavor
to make myself understood, by requesting you to inform me for what sum
you propose to draw upon me?”

“Let me beg of you not to hesitate in naming your wishes; you will then
be convinced that the resources of the house of Danglars, however
limited, are still equal to meeting the largest demands; and were you
even to require a million——”

“I said a million,” replied Danglars, with the confidence of ignorance.

And with these words Monte Cristo took from his pocket a small case
containing his visiting-cards, and drew forth two orders on the treasury
for 500,000 francs each, payable at sight to the bearer. A man like
Danglars was wholly inaccessible to any gentler method of correction.
The effect of the present revelation was stunning; he trembled and was
on the verge of apoplexy. The pupils of his eyes, as he gazed at Monte
Cristo dilated horribly.

The blow had struck home, and Danglars was entirely vanquished; with a
trembling hand he took the two letters from the count, who held them
carelessly between finger and thumb, and proceeded to scrutinize the
signatures, with a minuteness that the count might have regarded as
insulting, had it not suited his present purpose to mislead the banker.

“Oh, sir,” said Danglars, after he had convinced himself of the
authenticity of the documents he held, and rising as if to salute the
power of gold personified in the man before him,—“three letters of
unlimited credit! I can be no longer mistrustful, but you must pardon
me, my dear count, for confessing to some degree of astonishment.”

“Why,” replied Monte Cristo, “since we mutually understand each
other—for such I presume is the case?” Danglars bowed assentingly. “You
are quite sure that not a lurking doubt or suspicion lingers in your
mind?”

“Oh, my dear count,” exclaimed Danglars, “I never for an instant
entertained such a feeling towards you.”

“Six millions!” gasped Danglars—“so be it.”

“The money you desire shall be at your house by ten o’clock tomorrow
morning, my dear count,” replied Danglars. “How would you like to have
it? in gold, silver, or notes?”

“I must confess to you, count,” said Danglars, “that I have hitherto
imagined myself acquainted with the degree of all the great fortunes of
Europe, and still wealth such as yours has been wholly unknown to me.
May I presume to ask whether you have long possessed it?”

“With your tastes, and means of gratifying them,” continued Danglars,
“you will exhibit a splendor that must effectually put us poor miserable
millionaires quite in the shade. If I mistake not you are an admirer of
paintings, at least I judged so from the attention you appeared to be
bestowing on mine when I entered the room. If you will permit me, I
shall be happy to show you my picture gallery, composed entirely of
works by the ancient masters—warranted as such. Not a modern picture
among them. I cannot endure the modern school of painting.”

“But all this may come later, when we shall be better known to each
other. For the present, I will confine myself (if perfectly agreeable to
you) to introducing you to the Baroness Danglars—excuse my impatience,
my dear count, but a client like you is almost like a member of the
family.”

Monte Cristo bowed, in sign that he accepted the proffered honor;
Danglars rang and was answered by a servant in a showy livery.

“Is the baroness at home?” inquired Danglars.

“And who is with madame?—M. Debray?” inquired Danglars, with an air of
indulgence and good-nature that made Monte Cristo smile, acquainted as
he was with the secrets of the banker’s domestic life.

Danglars nodded his head; then, turning to Monte Cristo, said, “M.
Lucien Debray is an old friend of ours, and private secretary to the
Minister of the Interior. As for my wife, I must tell you, she lowered
herself by marrying me, for she belongs to one of the most ancient
families in France. Her maiden name was De Servières, and her first
husband was Colonel the Marquis of Nargonne.”

“I have not the honor of knowing Madame Danglars; but I have already met
M. Lucien Debray.”

“Ah, indeed?” said Danglars; “and where was that?”

“True, true,” cried Danglars. “Let me see; have I not heard talk of some
strange adventure with bandits or thieves hid in ruins, and of his
having had a miraculous escape? I forget how, but I know he used to
amuse my wife and daughter by telling them about it after his return
from Italy.”

“With your permission,” said Danglars, bowing, “I will precede you, to
show you the way.”

The baron, followed by the count, traversed a long series of apartments,
in which the prevailing characteristics were heavy magnificence and the
gaudiness of ostentatious wealth, until he reached the boudoir of Madame
Danglars—a small octagonal-shaped room, hung with pink satin, covered
with white Indian muslin. The chairs were of ancient workmanship and
materials; over the doors were painted sketches of shepherds and
shepherdesses, after the style and manner of Boucher; and at each side
pretty medallions in crayons, harmonizing well with the furnishings of
this charming apartment, the only one throughout the great mansion in
which any distinctive taste prevailed. The truth was, it had been
entirely overlooked in the plan arranged and followed out by M. Danglars
and his architect, who had been selected to aid the baron in the great
work of improvement solely because he was the most fashionable and
celebrated decorator of the day. The decorations of the boudoir had then
been left entirely to Madame Danglars and Lucien Debray. M. Danglars,
however, while possessing a great admiration for the antique, as it was
understood during the time of the Directory, entertained the most
sovereign contempt for the simple elegance of his wife’s favorite
sitting-room, where, by the way, he was never permitted to intrude,
unless, indeed, he excused his own appearance by ushering in some more
agreeable visitor than himself; and even then he had rather the air and
manner of a person who was himself introduced, than that of being the
presenter of another, his reception being cordial or frigid, in
proportion as the person who accompanied him chanced to please or
displease the baroness.

Madame Danglars (who, although past the first bloom of youth, was still
strikingly handsome) was now seated at the piano, a most elaborate piece
of cabinet and inlaid work, while Lucien Debray, standing before a small
work-table, was turning over the pages of an album.

Lucien had found time, preparatory to the count’s arrival, to relate
many particulars respecting him to Madame Danglars. It will be
remembered that Monte Cristo had made a lively impression on the minds
of all the party assembled at the breakfast given by Albert de Morcerf;
and although Debray was not in the habit of yielding to such feelings,
he had never been able to shake off the powerful influence excited in
his mind by the impressive look and manner of the count, consequently
the description given by Lucien to the baroness bore the highly-colored
tinge of his own heated imagination. Already excited by the wonderful
stories related of the count by de Morcerf, it is no wonder that Madame
Danglars eagerly listened to, and fully credited, all the additional
circumstances detailed by Debray. This posing at the piano and over the
album was only a little ruse adopted by way of precaution. A most
gracious welcome and unusual smile were bestowed on M. Danglars; the
count, in return for his gentlemanly bow, received a formal though
graceful courtesy, while Lucien exchanged with the count a sort of
distant recognition, and with Danglars a free and easy nod.

“Baroness,” said Danglars, “give me leave to present to you the Count of
Monte Cristo, who has been most warmly recommended to me by my
correspondents at Rome. I need but mention one fact to make all the
ladies in Paris court his notice, and that is, that he has come to take
up his abode in Paris for a year, during which brief period he proposes
to spend six millions of money. That means balls, dinners, and lawn
parties without end, in all of which I trust the count will remember us,
as he may depend upon it we shall him, in our own humble
entertainments.”

In spite of the gross flattery and coarseness of this address, Madame
Danglars could not forbear gazing with considerable interest on a man
capable of expending six millions in twelve months, and who had selected
Paris for the scene of his princely extravagance.

At this instant the favorite attendant of Madame Danglars entered the
boudoir; approaching her mistress, she spoke some words in an undertone.
Madame Danglars turned very pale, then exclaimed:

Turning impatiently towards her husband, Madame Danglars demanded, “Is
this true?”

“Is what true, madame?” inquired Danglars, visibly agitated.

“Be kind enough, madame, to listen to me,” said Danglars.

“Oh, yes; I will listen, monsieur, for I am most curious to hear what
explanation you will give. These two gentlemen shall decide between us;
but, first, I will state the case to them. Gentlemen,” continued the
baroness, “among the ten horses in the stables of Baron Danglars, are
two that belong exclusively to me—a pair of the handsomest and most
spirited creatures to be found in Paris. But to you, at least, M.
Debray, I need not give a further description, because to you my
beautiful pair of dappled grays were well known. Well, I had promised
Madame de Villefort the loan of my carriage to drive tomorrow to the
Bois; but when my coachman goes to fetch the grays from the stables they
are gone—positively gone. No doubt M. Danglars has sacrificed them to
the selfish consideration of gaining some thousands of paltry francs.
Oh, what a detestable crew they are, these mercenary speculators!”

“Madame,” replied Danglars, “the horses were not sufficiently quiet for
you; they were scarcely four years old, and they made me extremely
uneasy on your account.”

As Debray walked towards the window, Danglars approached his wife.

Madame Danglars surveyed her husband with a look of withering contempt.

Danglars looked absolutely stupefied.

“I cannot believe it,” murmured the banker. Madame Danglars whispered a
few words in the ear of Debray, who approached Monte Cristo, saying,
“The baroness wishes to know what you paid her husband for the horses.”

Debray conveyed the count’s reply to the baroness. Poor Danglars looked
so crest-fallen and discomfited that Monte Cristo assumed a pitying air
towards him.

Danglars made no reply; he was occupied in anticipations of the coming
scene between himself and the baroness, whose frowning brow, like that
of Olympic Jove, predicted a storm. Debray, who perceived the gathering
clouds, and felt no desire to witness the explosion of Madame Danglars’
rage, suddenly recollected an appointment, which compelled him to take
his leave; while Monte Cristo, unwilling by prolonging his stay to
destroy the advantages he hoped to obtain, made a farewell bow and
departed, leaving Danglars to endure the angry reproaches of his wife.

“Excellent,” murmured Monte Cristo to himself, as he came away. “All has
gone according to my wishes. The domestic peace of this family is
henceforth in my hands. Now, then, to play another master-stroke, by
which I shall gain the heart of both husband and wife—delightful!
Still,” added he, “amid all this, I have not yet been presented to
Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars, whose acquaintance I should have been
glad to make. But,” he went on with his peculiar smile, “I am here in
Paris, and have plenty of time before me—by and by will do for that.”

With these reflections he entered his carriage and returned home. Two
hours afterwards, Madame Danglars received a most flattering epistle
from the count, in which he entreated her to receive back her favorite
“dappled grays,” protesting that he could not endure the idea of making
his entry into the Parisian world of fashion with the knowledge that his
splendid equipage had been obtained at the price of a lovely woman’s
regrets. The horses were sent back wearing the same harness she had seen
on them in the morning; only, by the count’s orders, in the centre of
each rosette that adorned either side of their heads, had been fastened
a large diamond.

To Danglars Monte Cristo also wrote, requesting him to excuse the
whimsical gift of a capricious millionaire, and to beg the baroness to
pardon the Eastern fashion adopted in the return of the horses.

“My wretched curiosity has brought all this about,” pursued the lady.
“All Paris rung with the praises of Madame Danglars’ beautiful horses,
and I had the folly to desire to know whether they really merited the
high praise given to them.”

“They do, indeed. May I inquire if you are acquainted with Madame
Danglars?”

“No, I do not,” replied Monte Cristo; “it is a small place I have
purchased quite lately. My place of abode is No. 30, Avenue des Champs-
Élysées; but I see you have quite recovered from your fright, and are,
no doubt, desirous of returning home. Anticipating your wishes, I have
desired the same horses you came with to be put to one of my carriages,
and Ali, he whom you think so very ugly,” continued he, addressing the
boy with a smiling air, “will have the honor of driving you home, while
your coachman remains here to attend to the necessary repairs of your
calash. As soon as that important business is concluded, I will have a
pair of my own horses harnessed to convey it direct to Madame Danglars.”

Scarcely had the first congratulations upon her marvellous escape been
gone through when she wrote the following letter to Madame Danglars:—

Monte Cristo pointed to a chair, which the procureur was obliged to take
the trouble to move forwards himself, while the count merely fell back
into his own, on which he had been kneeling when M. Villefort entered.
Thus the count was halfway turned towards his visitor, having his back
towards the window, his elbow resting on the geographical chart which
furnished the theme of conversation for the moment,—a conversation which
assumed, as in the case of the interviews with Danglars and Morcerf, a
turn analogous to the persons, if not to the situation.

“I will tell you,” replied the young girl, “for it is but right you
should know. Well, on the day when your appointment as an officer of the
Legion of Honor was announced in the papers, we were all sitting with my
grandfather, M. Noirtier; M. Danglars was there also—you recollect M.
Danglars, do you not, Maximilian, the banker, whose horses ran away with
my mother-in-law and little brother, and very nearly killed them? While
the rest of the company were discussing the approaching marriage of
Mademoiselle Danglars, I was reading the paper to my grandfather; but
when I came to the paragraph about you, although I had done nothing else
but read it over to myself all the morning (you know you had told me all
about it the previous evening), I felt so happy, and yet so nervous, at
the idea of speaking your name aloud, and before so many people, that I
really think I should have passed it over, but for the fear that my
doing so might create suspicions as to the cause of my silence; so I
summoned up all my courage, and read it as firmly and as steadily as I
could.”

“Well, would you believe it? directly my father caught the sound of your
name he turned round quite hastily, and, like a poor silly thing, I was
so persuaded that everyone must be as much affected as myself by the
utterance of your name, that I was not surprised to see my father start,
and almost tremble; but I even thought (though that surely must have
been a mistake) that M. Danglars trembled too.”

“‘Yes,’ replied M. Danglars, ‘I believe he is the son of the old
shipowner.’”

“Brutal politics, I must confess.” said Maximilian; “but don’t attach
any serious importance, dear, to what your father said. My father was
not a bit behind yours in that sort of talk. ‘Why,’ said he, ‘does not
the emperor, who has devised so many clever and efficient modes of
improving the art of war, organize a regiment of lawyers, judges and
legal practitioners, sending them in the hottest fire the enemy could
maintain, and using them to save better men?’ You see, my dear, that for
picturesque expression and generosity of spirit there is not much to
choose between the language of either party. But what did M. Danglars
say to this outburst on the part of the procureur?”

“Oh, I have often heard whispers of things that seem to me most
strange—the father a Bonapartist, the son a Royalist; what can have been
the reason of so singular a difference in parties and politics? But to
resume my story; I turned towards my grandfather, as though to question
him as to the cause of his emotion; he looked expressively at the
newspaper I had been reading. ‘What is the matter, dear grandfather?’
said I, ‘are you pleased?’ He gave me a sign in the affirmative. ‘With
what my father said just now?’ He returned a sign in the negative.
‘Perhaps you liked what M. Danglars said?’ Another sign in the negative.
‘Oh, then, you were glad to hear that M. Morrel (I didn’t dare to say
Maximilian) had been made an officer of the Legion of Honor?’ He
signified assent; only think of the poor old man’s being so pleased to
think that you, who were a perfect stranger to him, had been made an
officer of the Legion of Honor! Perhaps it was a mere whim on his part,
for he is falling, they say, into second childhood, but I love him for
showing so much interest in you.”

The pretext of an opera engagement was so much the more feasible, as
there chanced to be on that very night a more than ordinary attraction
at the Académie Royale. Levasseur, who had been suffering under severe
illness, made his reappearance in the character of Bertram, and, as
usual, the announcement of the most admired production of the favorite
composer of the day had attracted a brilliant and fashionable audience.
Morcerf, like most other young men of rank and fortune, had his
orchestra stall, with the certainty of always finding a seat in at least
a dozen of the principal boxes occupied by persons of his acquaintance;
he had, moreover, his right of entry into the omnibus box. Château-
Renaud rented a stall beside his own, while Beauchamp, as a journalist,
had unlimited range all over the theatre. It happened that on this
particular night the minister’s box was placed at the disposal of Lucien
Debray, who offered it to the Comte de Morcerf, who again, upon his
rejection of it by Mercédès, sent it to Danglars, with an intimation
that he should probably do himself the honor of joining the baroness and
her daughter during the evening, in the event of their accepting the box
in question. The ladies received the offer with too much pleasure to
dream of a refusal. To no class of persons is the presentation of a
gratuitous opera-box more acceptable than to the wealthy millionaire,
who still hugs economy while boasting of carrying a king’s ransom in his
waistcoat pocket.

Danglars had, however, protested against showing himself in a
ministerial box, declaring that his political principles, and his
parliamentary position as member of the opposition party would not
permit him so to commit himself; the baroness had, therefore, despatched
a note to Lucien Debray, bidding him call for them, it being wholly
impossible for her to go alone with Eugénie to the opera.

There is no gainsaying the fact that a very unfavorable construction
would have been put upon the circumstance if the two women had gone
without escort, while the addition of a third, in the person of her
mother’s admitted lover, enabled Mademoiselle Danglars to defy malice
and ill-nature. One must take the world as one finds it.

“Shut up, there!” cried the pit in chorus. And this time the tone and
manner in which the command was given, betokened such growing hostility
that the two young men perceived, for the first time, that the mandate
was addressed to them. Leisurely turning round, they calmly scrutinized
the various countenances around them, as though demanding some one
person who would take upon himself the responsibility of what they
deemed excessive impertinence; but as no one responded to the challenge,
the friends turned again to the front of the theatre, and affected to
busy themselves with the stage. At this moment the door of the
minister’s box opened, and Madame Danglars, accompanied by her daughter,
entered, escorted by Lucien Debray, who assiduously conducted them to
their seats.

“I tell you what, my dear fellow,” said Château-Renaud, “I cannot
imagine what objection you can possibly have to Mademoiselle
Danglars—that is, setting aside her want of ancestry and somewhat
inferior rank, which by the way I don’t think you care very much about.
Now, barring all that, I mean to say she is a deuced fine girl!”

And, indeed, it required but one glance at Mademoiselle Danglars to
comprehend the justness of Morcerf’s remark. She was beautiful, but her
beauty was of too marked and decided a character to please a fastidious
taste; her hair was raven black, but its natural waves seemed somewhat
rebellious; her eyes, of the same color as her hair, were surmounted by
well-arched brows, whose great defect, however, consisted in an almost
habitual frown, while her whole physiognomy wore that expression of
firmness and decision so little in accordance with the gentler
attributes of her sex—her nose was precisely what a sculptor would have
chosen for a chiselled Juno. Her mouth, which might have been found
fault with as too large, displayed teeth of pearly whiteness, rendered
still more conspicuous by the brilliant carmine of her lips, contrasting
vividly with her naturally pale complexion. But that which completed the
almost masculine look Morcerf found so little to his taste, was a dark
mole, of much larger dimensions than these freaks of nature generally
are, placed just at the corner of her mouth; and the effect tended to
increase the expression of self-dependence that characterized her
countenance.

As regarded her attainments, the only fault to be found with them was
the same that a fastidious connoisseur might have found with her beauty,
that they were somewhat too erudite and masculine for so young a person.
She was a perfect linguist, a first-rate artist, wrote poetry, and
composed music; to the study of the latter she professed to be entirely
devoted, following it with an indefatigable perseverance, assisted by a
schoolfellow,—a young woman without fortune whose talent promised to
develop into remarkable powers as a singer. It was rumored that she was
an object of almost paternal interest to one of the principal composers
of the day, who excited her to spare no pains in the cultivation of her
voice, which might hereafter prove a source of wealth and independence.
But this counsel effectually decided Mademoiselle Danglars never to
commit herself by being seen in public with one destined for a
theatrical life; and acting upon this principle, the banker’s daughter,
though perfectly willing to allow Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly (that
was the name of the young virtuosa) to practice with her through the
day, took especial care not to be seen in her company. Still, though not
actually received at the Hôtel Danglars in the light of an acknowledged
friend, Louise was treated with far more kindness and consideration than
is usually bestowed on a governess.

The curtain fell almost immediately after the entrance of Madame
Danglars into her box, the band quitted the orchestra for the accustomed
half-hour’s interval allowed between the acts, and the audience were
left at liberty to promenade the salon or lobbies, or to pay and receive
visits in their respective boxes.

Morcerf and Château-Renaud were amongst the first to avail themselves of
this permission. For an instant the idea struck Madame Danglars that
this eagerness on the part of the young viscount arose from his
impatience to join her party, and she whispered her expectations to her
daughter, that Albert was hurrying to pay his respects to them.
Mademoiselle Eugénie, however, merely returned a dissenting movement of
the head, while, with a cold smile, she directed the attention of her
mother to an opposite box on the first circle, in which sat the Countess
G——, and where Morcerf had just made his appearance.

“My good fellow,” said Château-Renaud, “the count is your friend and you
treat him accordingly. Do not believe what Albert is telling you,
countess; so far from the sensation excited in the Parisian circles by
the appearance of the Count of Monte Cristo having abated, I take upon
myself to declare that it is as strong as ever. His first astounding act
upon coming amongst us was to present a pair of horses, worth 32,000
francs, to Madame Danglars; his second, the almost miraculous
preservation of Madame de Villefort’s life; now it seems that he has
carried off the prize awarded by the Jockey Club. I therefore maintain,
in spite of Morcerf, that not only is the count the object of interest
at this present moment, but also that he will continue to be so for a
month longer if he pleases to exhibit an eccentricity of conduct which,
after all, may be his ordinary mode of existence.”

Upon this occasion an unmistakable sign from Madame Danglars intimated
her desire to see Albert in her box directly the curtain fell on the
second act, and neither the politeness nor good taste of Morcerf would
permit his neglecting an invitation so unequivocally given. At the close
of the act he therefore went to the baroness.

“Is it not almost incredible,” said Madame Danglars, “that a person
having at least half a million of secret-service money at his command,
should possess so little information?”

“Perhaps he has discovered some mine,” said Madame Danglars. “I suppose
you know he has an order for unlimited credit on the baron’s banking
establishment?”

“And, further, that he stated to M. Danglars his intention of only
staying a year in Paris, during which time he proposed to spend six
millions.

“Then your count entertains visitors, does he?” asked Madame Danglars.

“I must try and persuade M. Danglars to invite him to a ball or dinner,
or something of the sort, that he may be compelled to ask us in return.”

“See how the artist peeps out!” exclaimed Madame Danglars. “My poor
Eugénie, you must conceal your passion for the fine arts.”

“Yes,” said Madame Danglars, “that is she. Shall I tell you what you
ought to do, Morcerf?”

“Why, in the first place, I heard it from Madame Danglars, who, by the
by, is dying to see you in her box, or to have you seen there by others;
secondly, I learned it from Beauchamp’s journal; and thirdly, from my
own imagination. Why, if you sought concealment, did you call your horse
Vampa?”

The third act had begun; and during its progress the Count of Morcerf,
according to his promise, made his appearance in the box of Madame
Danglars. The Count of Morcerf was not a person to excite either
interest or curiosity in a place of public amusement; his presence,
therefore, was wholly unnoticed, save by the occupants of the box in
which he had just seated himself.

The count left his box, and a moment later was saluting the Baronne
Danglars, who could not restrain a cry of mingled pleasure and surprise.

“Oh, you are no stranger—at least not by name,” replied Madame Danglars,
“and the last two or three days we have really talked of nothing but
you. Eugénie,” continued the baroness, turning towards her daughter,
“this is the Count of Monte Cristo.”

The count bowed, while Mademoiselle Danglars bent her head slightly.

“Yes, indeed, count,” said Madame Danglars; “and tell me, did you ever
see at the court of Ali Tepelini, whom you so gloriously and valiantly
served, a more exquisite beauty or richer costume?”

“But look!” exclaimed Madame Danglars.

So saying, he bowed to the baroness and her daughter, exchanged a
parting shake of the hand with Debray and the count, and left Madame
Danglars’ box. Upon his return to Haydée he found her still very pale.
As soon as she saw him she seized his hand; her own hands were moist and
icy cold.

Some days after this meeting, Albert de Morcerf visited the Count of
Monte Cristo at his house in the Champs-Élysées, which had already
assumed that palace-like appearance which the count’s princely fortune
enabled him to give even to his most temporary residences. He came to
renew the thanks of Madame Danglars which had been already conveyed to
the count through the medium of a letter, signed “Baronne Danglars, née
Hermine de Servieux.”

Albert was accompanied by Lucien Debray, who, joining in his friend’s
conversation, added some passing compliments, the source of which the
count’s talent for finesse easily enabled him to guess. He was convinced
that Lucien’s visit was due to a double feeling of curiosity, the larger
half of which sentiment emanated from the Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin. In
short, Madame Danglars, not being able personally to examine in detail
the domestic economy and household arrangements of a man who gave away
horses worth 30,000 francs and who went to the opera with a Greek slave
wearing diamonds to the amount of a million of money, had deputed those
eyes, by which she was accustomed to see, to give her a faithful account
of the mode of life of this incomprehensible person. But the count did
not appear to suspect that there could be the slightest connection
between Lucien’s visit and the curiosity of the baroness.

“You are in constant communication with the Baron Danglars?” the count
inquired of Albert de Morcerf.

“Oh, things take their course without our assistance. While we are
forgetting them, they are falling into their appointed order; and when,
again, our attention is directed to them, we are surprised at the
progress they have made towards the proposed end. My father and M.
Danglars served together in Spain, my father in the army and M. Danglars
in the commissariat department. It was there that my father, ruined by
the revolution, and M. Danglars, who never had possessed any patrimony,
both laid the foundations of their different fortunes.”

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo “I think M. Danglars mentioned that in a visit
which I paid him; and,” continued he, casting a side-glance at Lucien,
who was turning over the leaves of an album, “Mademoiselle Eugénie is
pretty—I think I remember that to be her name.”

“Mademoiselle Danglars is too rich for me,” replied Morcerf, “and that
frightens me.”

“That, perhaps, might not be considered a large sum, in Paris
especially,” said the count; “but everything does not depend on wealth,
and it is a fine thing to have a good name, and to occupy a high station
in society. Your name is celebrated, your position magnificent; and then
the Comte de Morcerf is a soldier, and it is pleasing to see the
integrity of a Bayard united to the poverty of a Duguesclin;
disinterestedness is the brightest ray in which a noble sword can shine.
As for me, I consider the union with Mademoiselle Danglars a most
suitable one; she will enrich you, and you will ennoble her.”

“It is my mother who dissents; she has a clear and penetrating judgment,
and does not smile on the proposed union. I cannot account for it, but
she seems to entertain some prejudice against the Danglars.”

“Oh, it will be too great a disappointment to my father if I do not
marry Mademoiselle Danglars.”

“Yes; I am calculating—by the way, Morcerf, that indirectly concerns
you—I am calculating what the house of Danglars must have gained by the
last rise in Haiti bonds; from 206 they have risen to 409 in three days,
and the prudent banker had purchased at 206; therefore he must have made
300,000 livres.”

“Ah, Haitians,—that is quite another thing! Haitians are the écarté of
French stock-jobbing. We may like bouillotte, delight in whist, be
enraptured with boston, and yet grow tired of them all; but we always
come back to écarté—it is not only a game, it is a hors-d’œuvre! M.
Danglars sold yesterday at 405, and pockets 300,000 francs. Had he but
waited till today, the price would have fallen to 205, and instead of
gaining 300,000 francs, he would have lost 20 or 25,000.”

“Ah,” said the count, “I see that M. Danglars is accustomed to play at
gaining or losing 300,000 francs in a day; he must be enormously rich.”

“It is not he who plays!” exclaimed Lucien; “it is Madame Danglars; she
is indeed daring.”

“So much so that the baroness very rarely comes to the house, and my
mother, has not, I think, visited Madame Danglars twice in her whole
life.”

“Then,” said the count, “I am emboldened to speak openly to you. M.
Danglars is my banker; M. de Villefort has overwhelmed me with
politeness in return for a service which a casual piece of good fortune
enabled me to render him. I predict from all this an avalanche of
dinners and routs. Now, in order not to presume on this, and also to be
beforehand with them, I have, if agreeable to you, thought of inviting
M. and Madame Danglars, and M. and Madame de Villefort, to my country-
house at Auteuil. If I were to invite you and the Count and Countess of
Morcerf to this dinner, I should give it the appearance of being a
matrimonial meeting, or at least Madame de Morcerf would look upon the
affair in that light, especially if Baron Danglars did me the honor to
bring his daughter. In that case your mother would hold me in aversion,
and I do not at all wish that; on the contrary, I desire to stand high
in her esteem.”

“Well,” said he to Morcerf, “but I think your father will not be the
only angry one; M. and Madame Danglars will think me a very ill-mannered
person. They know that I am intimate with you—that you are, in fact; one
of the oldest of my Parisian acquaintances—and they will not find you at
my house; they will certainly ask me why I did not invite you. Be sure
to provide yourself with some previous engagement which shall have a
semblance of probability, and communicate the fact to me by a line in
writing. You know that with bankers nothing but a written document will
be valid.”

“Well, I will immediately call on M. Danglars, and tell him that my
mother and myself must leave Paris tomorrow. I have not seen you,
consequently I know nothing of your dinner.”

“Ah, take care, you were teaching me just now how, in case of an
invitation to dinner, one might creditably make an excuse. I require the
proof of a pre-engagement. I am not a banker, like M. Danglars, but I am
quite as incredulous as he is.”

“And you know I am to marry Mademoiselle Danglars,” said Albert,
laughing.

“Yes, you will receive it from your father personally, but Lord Wilmore
will be the security for the money. He has, at the request of your
father, opened an account of 5,000 francs a month at M. Danglars’, which
is one of the safest banks in Paris.”

“On Saturday, if you will—Yes.—Let me see—Saturday—I am to dine at my
country house, at Auteuil, on that day, Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28.
Several persons are invited, and among others, M. Danglars, your banker.
I will introduce you to him, for it will be necessary he should know
you, as he is to pay your money.”

At length, the long-desired sound was heard, and instead of one figure,
as he had expected, he perceived that two were approaching him. The
delay had been occasioned by a visit from Madame Danglars and Eugénie,
which had been prolonged beyond the time at which Valentine was
expected. That she might not appear to fail in her promise to
Maximilian, she proposed to Mademoiselle Danglars that they should take
a walk in the garden, being anxious to show that the delay, which was
doubtless a cause of vexation to him, was not occasioned by any neglect
on her part. The young man, with the intuitive perception of a lover,
quickly understood the circumstances in which she was involuntarily
placed, and he was comforted. Besides, although she avoided coming
within speaking distance, Valentine arranged so that Maximilian could
see her pass and repass, and each time she went by, she managed,
unperceived by her companion, to cast an expressive look at the young
man, which seemed to say, “Have patience! You see it is not my fault.”

And Maximilian was patient, and employed himself in mentally contrasting
the two girls,—one fair, with soft languishing eyes, a figure gracefully
bending like a weeping willow; the other a brunette, with a fierce and
haughty expression, and as straight as a poplar. It is unnecessary to
state that, in the eyes of the young man, Valentine did not suffer by
the contrast. In about half an hour the girls went away, and Maximilian
understood that Mademoiselle Danglars’ visit had at last come to an end.
In a few minutes Valentine re-entered the garden alone. For fear that
anyone should be observing her return, she walked slowly; and instead of
immediately directing her steps towards the gate, she seated herself on
a bench, and, carefully casting her eyes around, to convince herself
that she was not watched, she presently arose, and proceeded quickly to
join Maximilian.

“Yes, I recognized Mademoiselle Danglars. I was not aware that you were
so intimate with her.”

“Ah, how good you are to say so, Valentine! You possess a quality which
can never belong to Mademoiselle Danglars. It is that indefinable charm
which is to a woman what perfume is to the flower and flavor to the
fruit, for the beauty of either is not the only quality we seek.”

“No, Valentine, I assure you such is not the case. I was observing you
both when you were walking in the garden, and, on my honor, without at
all wishing to depreciate the beauty of Mademoiselle Danglars, I cannot
understand how any man can really love her.”

“No; but tell me—it is a question of simple curiosity, and which was
suggested by certain ideas passing in my mind relative to Mademoiselle
Danglars——”

“Does Mademoiselle Danglars object to this marriage with M. de Morcerf
on account of loving another?”

“If such be the case, my dear Valentine, you must yourself have felt, or
at all events will soon feel, the effects of his presence. He meets
Albert de Morcerf in Italy—it is to rescue him from the hands of the
banditti; he introduces himself to Madame Danglars—it is that he may
give her a royal present; your step-mother and her son pass before his
door—it is that his Nubian may save them from destruction. This man
evidently possesses the power of influencing events, both as regards men
and things. I never saw more simple tastes united to greater
magnificence. His smile is so sweet when he addresses me, that I forget
it ever can be bitter to others. Ah, Valentine, tell me, if he ever
looked on you with one of those sweet smiles? if so, depend on it, you
will be happy.”

We will now relate what was passing in the house of the king’s attorney
after the departure of Madame Danglars and her daughter, and during the
time of the conversation between Maximilian and Valentine, which we have
just detailed.

The man looked at the bank-notes, felt them, counted them, turned pale,
then red, then rushed into his room to drink a glass of water, but he
had no time to reach the water-jug, and fainted in the midst of his
dried herbs. Five minutes after the new telegram reached the minister,
Debray had the horses put to his carriage, and drove to Danglars’ house.

The baroness did not wait for a repetition; she ran to her husband, who
immediately hastened to his agent, and ordered him to sell at any price.
When it was seen that Danglars sold, the Spanish funds fell directly.
Danglars lost five hundred thousand francs; but he rid himself of all
his Spanish shares. The same evening the following was read in Le
Messager:

All that evening nothing was spoken of but the foresight of Danglars,
who had sold his shares, and of the luck of the stock-jobber, who only
lost five hundred thousand francs by such a blow. Those who had kept
their shares, or bought those of Danglars, looked upon themselves as
ruined, and passed a very bad night. Next morning Le Moniteur contained
the following:

The funds rose one per cent higher than before they had fallen. This,
reckoning his loss, and what he had missed gaining, made the difference
of a million to Danglars.

“Good,” said Monte Cristo to Morrel, who was at his house when the news
arrived of the strange reverse of fortune of which Danglars had been the
victim, “I have just made a discovery for twenty-five thousand francs,
for which I would have paid a hundred thousand.”

“It is so good, that I have distanced M. de Château-Renaud, one of the
best riders in France, and M. Debray, who both mount the minister’s
Arabians; and close on their heels are the horses of Madame Danglars,
who always go at six leagues an hour.”

The instant Debray had touched the ground, he was at the carriage-door.
He offered his hand to the baroness, who, descending, took it with a
peculiarity of manner imperceptible to everyone but Monte Cristo. But
nothing escaped the count’s notice, and he observed a little note,
passed with the facility that indicates frequent practice, from the hand
of Madame Danglars to that of the minister’s secretary.

Madame Danglars threw a rapid and inquiring glance which could only be
interpreted by Monte Cristo, around the courtyard, over the peristyle,
and across the front of the house, then, repressing a slight emotion,
which must have been seen on her countenance if she had not kept her
color, she ascended the steps, saying to Morrel:

“It seems to me,” said Danglars, in his coarse tone, ill-concealed by a
forced smile, “that you have already got horses enough.”

Madame Danglars seldom allowed remarks of this kind to pass unnoticed,
but, to the surprise of the young people, she pretended not to hear it,
and said nothing. Monte Cristo smiled at her unusual humility, and
showed her two immense porcelain jars, over which wound marine plants,
of a size and delicacy that nature alone could produce. The baroness was
astonished.

Meanwhile, Danglars, who had cared little for curiosities, was
mechanically tearing off the blossoms of a splendid orange-tree, one
after another. When he had finished with the orange-tree, he began at
the cactus; but this, not being so easily plucked as the orange-tree,
pricked him dreadfully. He shuddered, and rubbed his eyes as though
awaking from a dream.

“Who are those gentlemen?” asked Danglars of Monte Cristo.

“But they appear to speak French with a very pure accent,” said
Danglars.

“Upon what subject?” asked Madame Danglars.

“A fine idea that of his,” said Danglars, shrugging his shoulders.
Madame Danglars looked at her husband with an expression which, at any
other time, would have indicated a storm, but for the second time she
controlled herself.

“Certainly, women alone know how to dissimulate,” said Monte Cristo to
himself, glancing at Madame Danglars, who was smiling on the procureur,
and embracing his wife.

“Madame Danglars?”

“No; you see plainly he is not dead. Instead of striking between the
sixth and seventh left ribs, as your countrymen do, you must have struck
higher or lower, and life is very tenacious in these lawyers, or rather
there is no truth in anything you have told me—it was a fright of the
imagination, a dream of your fancy. You went to sleep full of thoughts
of vengeance; they weighed heavily upon your stomach; you had the
nightmare—that’s all. Come, calm yourself, and reckon them up—M. and
Madame de Villefort, two; M. and Madame Danglars, four; M. de Château-
Renaud, M. Debray, M. Morrel, seven; Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti,
eight.”

The Count of Monte Cristo offered his arm to Madame de Villefort. “M. de
Villefort,” he said, “will you conduct the Baroness Danglars?”

And all present, even including Cavalcanti and his son, notwithstanding
the stiffness of the one and the carelessness of the other, were
thoughtful, on finding themselves assembled at the house of this
incomprehensible man. Madame Danglars had started when Villefort, on the
count’s invitation, offered his arm; and Villefort felt that his glance
was uneasy beneath his gold spectacles, when he felt the arm of the
baroness press upon his own. None of this had escaped the count, and
even by this mere contact of individuals the scene had already acquired
considerable interest for an observer.

M. de Villefort had on the right hand Madame Danglars, on his left
Morrel. The count was seated between Madame de Villefort and Danglars;
the other seats were filled by Debray, who was placed between the two
Cavalcanti, and by Château-Renaud, seated between Madame de Villefort
and Morrel.

“Gentlemen,” he said, “you will admit that, when arrived at a certain
degree of fortune, the superfluities of life are all that can be
desired; and the ladies will allow that, after having risen to a certain
eminence of position, the ideal alone can be more exalted. Now, to
follow out this reasoning, what is the marvellous?—that which we do not
understand. What is it that we really desire?—that which we cannot
obtain. Now, to see things which I cannot understand, to procure
impossibilities, these are the study of my life. I gratify my wishes by
two means—my will and my money. I take as much interest in the pursuit
of some whim as you do, M. Danglars, in promoting a new railway line;
you, M. de Villefort, in condemning a culprit to death; you, M. Debray,
in pacifying a kingdom; you, M. de Château-Renaud, in pleasing a woman;
and you, Morrel, in breaking a horse that no one can ride. For example,
you see these two fish; one brought from fifty leagues beyond St.
Petersburg, the other five leagues from Naples. Is it not amusing to see
them both on the same table?”

“What are the two fish?” asked Danglars.

“Just so. Now, M. Danglars, ask these gentlemen where they are caught.”

“Oh, nothing more easy. Each fish was brought over in a cask—one filled
with river herbs and weeds, the other with rushes and lake plants; they
were placed in a wagon built on purpose, and thus the sterlet lived
twelve days, the lamprey eight, and both were alive when my cook seized
them, killing one with milk and the other with wine. You do not believe
me, M. Danglars!”

“I cannot help doubting,” answered Danglars with his stupid smile.

Danglars opened his bewildered eyes; the company clapped their hands.
Four servants carried in two casks covered with aquatic plants, and in
each of which was breathing a fish similar to those on the table.

“But why have two of each sort?” asked Danglars.

“You are certainly an extraordinary man,” said Danglars; “and
philosophers may well say it is a fine thing to be rich.”

“And to have ideas,” added Madame Danglars.

“Why so?” said Danglars; “why dramatic?”

Monte Cristo looked inquiringly at his guests. Madame de Villefort rose,
Monte Cristo did the same, and the rest followed their example.
Villefort and Madame Danglars remained for a moment, as if rooted to
their seats; they questioned each other with vague and stupid glances.

“Did you hear?” said Madame Danglars.

Madame Danglars tried to utter a few words, but was not heard. Many
observations were made, the import of which was a unanimous opinion that
there was something sinister about the room.

Villefort became livid; Madame Danglars fell into a long seat placed
near the chimney.

Madame Danglars rose suddenly.

“What is there more?” said Debray, who had not failed to notice the
agitation of Madame Danglars.

“Ah, what else is there?” said Danglars; “for, at present, I cannot say
that I have seen anything extraordinary. What do you say, M.
Cavalcanti?”

Madame Danglars half fainted on the arm of Villefort, who was obliged to
support himself against the wall.

“What is the matter?” asked Debray, in a whisper, of Madame Danglars.

“Oh, no, sir,” said Madame Danglars; “but you suppose scenes in a manner
which gives them the appearance of reality.”

Here Madame Danglars, instead of being calmed by the soft picture,
uttered a groan and fainted.

“Madame Danglars is ill,” said Villefort; “it would be better to take
her to her carriage.”

Madame Danglars was carried into the adjoining room; Monte Cristo
dropped a very small portion of the red liquid upon her lips; she
returned to consciousness.

Villefort pressed her hand to let her know it was not a dream. They
looked for M. Danglars, but, as he was not especially interested in
poetical ideas, he had gone into the garden, and was talking with Major
Cavalcanti on the projected railway from Leghorn to Florence. Monte
Cristo seemed in despair. He took the arm of Madame Danglars, and
conducted her into the garden, where they found Danglars taking coffee
between the Cavalcanti.

He then took Villefort’s arm, and, at the same time, holding that of
Madame Danglars under his own, he dragged the procureur to the plantain-
tree, where the shade was thickest. All the other guests followed.

Monte Cristo felt the arm of Madame Danglars stiffen, while that of
Villefort trembled.

“Oh, their heads are soon cut off,” said Danglars.

“Indeed, count,” said Madame Danglars, “I am ashamed to own it, but all
your frightful stories have so upset me, that I must beg you to let me
sit down;” and she fell into a chair.

“I think Madame Danglars again requires your bottle,” he said. But
before Madame de Villefort could reach her friend, the procureur had
found time to whisper to Madame Danglars, “I must speak to you.”

“Thanks, my dear friend,” said Madame Danglars, trying to smile; “it is
over now, and I am much better.”

The evening passed on; Madame de Villefort expressed a desire to return
to Paris, which Madame Danglars had not dared to do, notwithstanding the
uneasiness she experienced. On his wife’s request, M. de Villefort was
the first to give the signal of departure. He offered a seat in his
landau to Madame Danglars, that she might be under the care of his wife.
As for M. Danglars, absorbed in an interesting conversation with M.
Cavalcanti, he paid no attention to anything that was passing. While
Monte Cristo had begged the smelling-bottle of Madame de Villefort, he
had noticed the approach of Villefort to Madame Danglars, and he soon
guessed all that had passed between them, though the words had been
uttered in so low a voice as hardly to be heard by Madame Danglars.
Without opposing their arrangements, he allowed Morrel, Château-Renaud,
and Debray to leave on horseback, and the ladies in M. de Villefort’s
carriage. Danglars, more and more delighted with Major Cavalcanti, had
offered him a seat in his carriage. Andrea Cavalcanti found his tilbury
waiting at the door; the groom, in every respect a caricature of the
English fashion, was standing on tiptoe to hold a large iron-gray horse.

Andrea had spoken very little during dinner; he was an intelligent lad,
and he feared to utter some absurdity before so many grand people,
amongst whom, with dilating eyes, he saw the king’s attorney. Then he
had been seized upon by Danglars, who, with a rapid glance at the stiff-
necked old major and his modest son, and taking into consideration the
hospitality of the count, made up his mind that he was in the society of
some nabob come to Paris to finish the worldly education of his heir. He
contemplated with unspeakable delight the large diamond which shone on
the major’s little finger; for the major, like a prudent man, in case of
any accident happening to his bank-notes, had immediately converted them
into an available asset. Then, after dinner, on the pretext of business,
he questioned the father and son upon their mode of living; and the
father and son, previously informed that it was through Danglars the one
was to receive his 48,000 francs and the other 50,000 livres annually,
were so full of affability that they would have shaken hands even with
the banker’s servants, so much did their gratitude need an object to
expend itself upon.

One thing above all the rest heightened the respect, nay almost the
veneration, of Danglars for Cavalcanti. The latter, faithful to the
principle of Horace, nil admirari, had contented himself with showing
his knowledge by declaring in what lake the best lampreys were caught.
Then he had eaten some without saying a word more; Danglars, therefore,
concluded that such luxuries were common at the table of the illustrious
descendant of the Cavalcanti, who most likely in Lucca fed upon trout
brought from Switzerland, and lobsters sent from England, by the same
means used by the count to bring the lampreys from Lake Fusaro, and the
sterlet from the Volga. Thus it was with much politeness of manner that
he heard Cavalcanti pronounce these words:

“And I, sir,” said Danglars, “shall be most happy to receive you.”

Upon which he offered to take Cavalcanti in his carriage to the Hôtel
des Princes, if it would not be depriving him of the company of his son.
To this Cavalcanti replied by saying that for some time past his son had
lived independently of him, that he had his own horses and carriages,
and that not having come together, it would not be difficult for them to
leave separately. The major seated himself, therefore, by the side of
Danglars, who was more and more charmed with the ideas of order and
economy which ruled this man, and yet who, being able to allow his son
60,000 francs a year, might be supposed to possess a fortune of 500,000
or 600,000 livres.

At that moment a hand touched his shoulder. The young man turned round,
thinking that Danglars or Monte Cristo had forgotten something they
wished to tell him, and had returned just as they were starting. But
instead of either of these, he saw nothing but a strange face, sunburnt,
and encircled by a beard, with eyes brilliant as carbuncles, and a smile
upon the mouth which displayed a perfect set of white teeth, pointed and
sharp as the wolf’s or jackal’s. A red handkerchief encircled his gray
head; torn and filthy garments covered his large bony limbs, which
seemed as though, like those of a skeleton, they would rattle as he
walked; and the hand with which he leaned upon the young man’s shoulder,
and which was the first thing Andrea saw, seemed of gigantic size.

At the Place Louis XV. the three young people separated—that is to say,
Morrel went to the Boulevards, Château-Renaud to the Pont de la
Révolution, and Debray to the Quai. Most probably Morrel and Château-
Renaud returned to their “domestic hearths,” as they say in the gallery
of the Chamber in well-turned speeches, and in the theatre of the Rue
Richelieu in well-written pieces; but it was not the case with Debray.
When he reached the wicket of the Louvre, he turned to the left,
galloped across the Carrousel, passed through the Rue Saint-Roch, and,
issuing from the Rue de la Michodière, he arrived at M. Danglars’ door
just at the same time that Villefort’s landau, after having deposited
him and his wife at the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, stopped to leave the
baroness at her own house.

Debray, with the air of a man familiar with the house, entered first
into the court, threw his bridle into the hands of a footman, and
returned to the door to receive Madame Danglars, to whom he offered his
arm, to conduct her to her apartments. The gate once closed, and Debray
and the baroness alone in the court, he asked:

“No, Hermine,” replied Debray; “you cannot make me believe that; on the
contrary, you were in excellent spirits when you arrived at the count’s.
M. Danglars was disagreeable, certainly, but I know how much you care
for his ill-humor. Someone has vexed you; I will allow no one to annoy
you.”

“You are deceived, Lucien, I assure you,” replied Madame Danglars; “and
what I have told you is really the case, added to the ill-humor you
remarked, but which I did not think it worth while to allude to.”

It was evident that Madame Danglars was suffering from that nervous
irritability which women frequently cannot account for even to
themselves; or that, as Debray had guessed, she had experienced some
secret agitation that she would not acknowledge to anyone. Being a man
who knew that the former of these symptoms was one of the inherent
penalties of womanhood, he did not then press his inquiries, but waited
for a more appropriate opportunity when he should again interrogate her,
or receive an avowal proprio motu.

“What is my daughter doing?” asked Madame Danglars.

“It is Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, who is playing while Mademoiselle
Danglars is in bed.”

“Well,” said Madame Danglars, “come and undress me.”

They entered the bedroom. Debray stretched himself upon a large couch,
and Madame Danglars passed into her dressing-room with Mademoiselle
Cornélie.

“My dear M. Lucien,” said Madame Danglars through the door, “you are
always complaining that Eugénie will not address a word to you.”

“True,” said Madame Danglars; “yet I think this will all pass off, and
that you will one day see her enter your study.”

“Go, Cornélie,” said Madame Danglars, “I do not require you any longer.”

Cornélie obeyed, and the next minute Madame Danglars left her room in a
charming loose dress, and came and sat down close to Debray. Then she
began thoughtfully to caress the little spaniel. Lucien looked at her
for a moment in silence.

And yet, as she could scarcely breathe, she rose and went towards a
looking-glass. “I am frightful tonight,” she said. Debray rose, smiling,
and was about to contradict the baroness upon this latter point, when
the door opened suddenly. M. Danglars appeared; Debray reseated himself.
At the noise of the door Madame Danglars turned round, and looked upon
her husband with an astonishment she took no trouble to conceal.

Debray was petrified, not only to hear Danglars speak so calmly and
politely, but because it was apparent that beneath outward politeness
there really lurked a determined spirit of opposition to anything his
wife might wish to do. The baroness was also surprised, and showed her
astonishment by a look which would doubtless have had some effect upon
her husband if he had not been intently occupied with the paper, where
he was looking to see the closing stock quotations. The result was, that
the proud look entirely failed of its purpose.

“My dear M. Debray,” said the banker, “do not kill yourself tonight
listening to the follies of Madame Danglars, for you can hear them as
well tomorrow; but I claim tonight and will devote it, if you will allow
me, to talk over some serious matters with my wife.”

“Do not think I wish to turn you out, my dear Debray,” continued
Danglars; “oh, no, not at all. An unexpected occurrence forces me to ask
my wife to have a little conversation with me; it is so rarely I make
such a request, I am sure you cannot grudge it to me.”

Lucien having left, Danglars took his place on the sofa, closed the open
book, and placing himself in a dreadfully dictatorial attitude, he began
playing with the dog; but the animal, not liking him as well as Debray,
and attempting to bite him, Danglars seized him by the skin of his neck
and threw him upon a couch on the other side of the room. The animal
uttered a cry during the transit, but, arrived at its destination, it
crouched behind the cushions, and stupefied at such unusual treatment
remained silent and motionless.

“It is because I am in a worse humor than usual,” replied Danglars.
Hermine looked at the banker with supreme disdain. These glances
frequently exasperated the pride of Danglars, but this evening he took
no notice of them.

“Not so,” replied Danglars; “your advice is wrong, so I shall not follow
it. My money boxes are my Pactolus, as, I think, M. Demoustier says, and
I will not retard its course, or disturb its calm. My clerks are honest
men, who earn my fortune, whom I pay much below their deserts, if I may
value them according to what they bring in; therefore I shall not get
into a passion with them; those with whom I will be in a passion are
those who eat my dinners, mount my horses, and exhaust my fortune.”

“You understand me perfectly, on the contrary,” said Danglars: “but, if
you will persist, I will tell you that I have just lost 700,000 francs
upon the Spanish loan.”

“Really?” said Danglars. “Well, this surprises me, for I thought you
took the liveliest interest in all my affairs!”

“But,” continued Danglars, “I find you did not even pause there——”

Danglars shrugged his shoulders. “Foolish creature,” he exclaimed.
“Women fancy they have talent because they have managed two or three
intrigues without being the talk of Paris! But know that if you had even
hidden your irregularities from your husband, who has but the
commencement of the art—for generally husbands will not see—you would
then have been but a faint imitation of most of your friends among the
women of the world. But it has not been so with me,—I see, and always
have seen, during the last sixteen years. You may, perhaps, have hidden
a thought; but not a step, not an action, not a fault, has escaped me,
while you flattered yourself upon your address, and firmly believed you
had deceived me. What has been the result?—that, thanks to my pretended
ignorance, there is none of your friends, from M. de Villefort to M.
Debray, who has not trembled before me. There is not one who has not
treated me as the master of the house,—the only title I desire with
respect to you; there is not one, in fact, who would have dared to speak
of me as I have spoken of them this day. I will allow you to make me
hateful, but I will prevent your rendering me ridiculous, and, above
all, I forbid you to ruin me.”

Madame Danglars was rooted to the spot; she made a violent effort to
reply to this last attack, but she fell upon a chair thinking of
Villefort, of the dinner scene, of the strange series of misfortunes
which had taken place in her house during the last few days, and changed
the usual calm of her establishment to a scene of scandalous debate.

Danglars did not even look at her, though she did her best to faint. He
shut the bedroom door after him, without adding another word, and
returned to his apartments; and when Madame Danglars recovered from her
half-fainting condition, she could almost believe that she had had a
disagreeable dream.

The day following this scene, at the hour Debray usually chose to pay a
visit to Madame Danglars on his way to his office, his coupé did not
appear. At this time, that is, about half-past twelve, Madame Danglars
ordered her carriage, and went out. Danglars, hidden behind a curtain,
watched the departure he had been waiting for. He gave orders that he
should be informed as soon as Madame Danglars appeared; but at two
o’clock she had not returned. He then called for his horses, drove to
the Chamber, and inscribed his name to speak against the budget. From
twelve to two o’clock Danglars had remained in his study, unsealing his
dispatches, and becoming more and more sad every minute, heaping figure
upon figure, and receiving, among other visits, one from Major
Cavalcanti, who, as stiff and exact as ever, presented himself precisely
at the hour named the night before, to terminate his business with the
banker.

On leaving the Chamber, Danglars, who had shown violent marks of
agitation during the sitting, and been more bitter than ever against the
ministry, re-entered his carriage, and told the coachman to drive to the
Avenue des Champs-Élysées, No. 30.

Monte Cristo was at home; only he was engaged with someone and begged
Danglars to wait for a moment in the drawing-room. While the banker was
waiting in the anteroom, the door opened, and a man dressed as an abbé
and doubtless more familiar with the house than he was, came in and
instead of waiting, merely bowed, passed on to the farther apartments,
and disappeared.

“Nay,” said Danglars, “it is my fault; I have chosen my visit at a wrong
time, and will retire.”

“I have been in ill-luck for several days,” said Danglars, “and I have
heard nothing but bad news.”

“Well, that’s what puzzles me,” replied Danglars; “the news of the
return of Don Carlos was brought by telegraph.”

“Third-rate,” said Danglars, rather humble, “what do you mean by that?”

“Confound it, yes!” replied Danglars.

“Oh,” said Danglars, becoming very pale, how you are running on!”

“Let us imagine seven such months,” continued Monte Cristo, in the same
tone. “Tell me, have you ever thought that seven times 1,700,000 francs
make nearly twelve millions? No, you have not;—well, you are right, for
if you indulged in such reflections, you would never risk your
principal, which is to the speculator what the skin is to civilized man.
We have our clothes, some more splendid than others,—this is our credit;
but when a man dies he has only his skin; in the same way, on retiring
from business, you have nothing but your real principal of about five or
six millions, at the most; for third-rate fortunes are never more than a
fourth of what they appear to be, like the locomotive on a railway, the
size of which is magnified by the smoke and steam surrounding it. Well,
out of the five or six millions which form your real capital, you have
just lost nearly two millions, which must, of course, in the same degree
diminish your credit and fictitious fortune; to follow out my simile,
your skin has been opened by bleeding, and this if repeated three or
four times will cause death—so pay attention to it, my dear Monsieur
Danglars. Do you want money? Do you wish me to lend you some?”

“What a bad calculator you are!” exclaimed Danglars, calling to his
assistance all his philosophy and dissimulation. “I have made money at
the same time by speculations which have succeeded. I have made up the
loss of blood by nutrition. I lost a battle in Spain, I have been
defeated in Trieste, but my naval army in India will have taken some
galleons, and my Mexican pioneers will have discovered some mine.”

“No, for I am only embarked in certainties,” replied Danglars, with the
air of a mountebank sounding his own praises; “to involve me, three
governments must crumble to dust.”

“So much the better. I congratulate you, my dear M. Danglars,” said
Monte Cristo; “I see I was deceived, and that you belong to the class of
second-rate fortunes.”

“I think I may aspire to that honor,” said Danglars with a smile, which
reminded Monte Cristo of the sickly moons which bad artists are so fond
of daubing into their pictures of ruins. “But, while we are speaking of
business,” Danglars added, pleased to find an opportunity of changing
the subject, “tell me what I am to do for M. Cavalcanti.”

“But that is not all,” continued Danglars; “he has opened an account
with my house for his son.”

“The young man is better,” said Danglars.

“Ah, I believe noblemen marry amongst themselves, do they not?” asked
Danglars carelessly; “they like to unite their fortunes.”

“Certainly,” said Danglars, “and this is further supported by the fact
of their not possessing an inch of land.”

“Ah, he has a palace?” said Danglars, laughing; “come, that is
something.”

“No; these grand lords on the other side of the Alps frequently marry
into plain families; like Jupiter, they like to cross the race. But do
you wish to marry Andrea, my dear M. Danglars, that you are asking so
many questions?”

“Ma foi,” said Danglars, “it would not be a bad speculation, I fancy,
and you know I am a speculator.”

“You are not thinking of Mademoiselle Danglars, I hope; you would not
like poor Andrea to have his throat cut by Albert?”

“Albert,” repeated Danglars, shrugging his shoulders; “ah, well; he
would care very little about it, I think.”

“Indeed, I imagine that Mademoiselle Danglars is as good as M. de
Morcerf.”

“Mademoiselle Danglars’ fortune will be great, no doubt, especially if
the telegraph should not make any more mistakes.”

“Yes, yes,” said Danglars, laughing, “it would do her a great deal of
good.”

“But still, if Albert be not so rich as Mademoiselle Danglars,” said the
count, “you must allow that he has a fine name?”

“And for this very reason,” said Danglars with a smile, which he tried
to make sardonic, “I prefer M. Andrea Cavalcanti to M. Albert de
Morcerf.”

“The Morcerfs!—Stay, my dear count,” said Danglars; “you are a man of
the world, are you not?”

“Because, though I am not a baron by birth, my real name is, at least,
Danglars.”

“Because Fernand and Danglars, being both parvenus, both having become
noble, both rich, are about equal in worth, excepting that there have
been certain things mentioned of him that were never said of me.”

“This is the mystery,” said Danglars. “I acknowledge I would have given
anything to find it out.”

“You are right,” exclaimed Danglars, rising quickly, “I will write
today.”

Danglars rushed out of the room, and made but one leap into his coupé.

Let us leave the banker driving his horses at their fullest speed, and
follow Madame Danglars in her morning excursion. We have said that at
half-past twelve o’clock Madame Danglars had ordered her horses, and had
left home in the carriage. She directed her course towards the Faubourg
Saint Germain, went down the Rue Mazarine, and stopped at the Passage du
Pont-Neuf. She descended, and went through the passage. She was very
plainly dressed, as would be the case with a woman of taste walking in
the morning. At the Rue Guénégaud she called a cab, and directed the
driver to go to the Rue de Harlay. As soon as she was seated in the
vehicle, she drew from her pocket a very thick black veil, which she
tied on to her straw bonnet. She then replaced the bonnet, and saw with
pleasure, in a little pocket-mirror, that her white complexion and
brilliant eyes were alone visible. The cab crossed the Pont-Neuf and
entered the Rue de Harlay by the Place Dauphine; the driver was paid as
the door opened, and stepping lightly up the stairs Madame Danglars soon
reached the Salle des Pas-Perdus.

There was a great deal going on that morning, and many business-like
persons at the Palais; business-like persons pay very little attention
to women, and Madame Danglars crossed the hall without exciting any more
attention than any other woman calling upon her lawyer.

There was a great press of people in M. de Villefort’s antechamber, but
Madame Danglars had no occasion even to pronounce her name. The instant
she appeared the door-keeper rose, came to her, and asked her whether
she was not the person with whom the procureur had made an appointment;
and on her affirmative answer being given, he conducted her by a private
passage to M. de Villefort’s office.

“Thanks, madame,—thanks for your punctuality;” and he offered a chair to
Madame Danglars, which she accepted, for her heart beat so violently
that she felt nearly suffocated.

“It is a long time, madame,” said the procureur, describing a half-
circle with his chair, so as to place himself exactly opposite to Madame
Danglars,—“it is a long time since I had the pleasure of speaking alone
with you, and I regret that we have only now met to enter upon a painful
conversation.”

“Sir,” said Madame Danglars, “you can feel for my emotion, can you not?
Spare me, then, I beseech you. When I look at this room,—whence so many
guilty creatures have departed, trembling and ashamed, when I look at
that chair before which I now sit trembling and ashamed,—oh, it requires
all my reason to convince me that I am not a very guilty woman and you a
menacing judge.”

“You?” said Madame Danglars.

“I think, sir, you exaggerate your situation,” said Madame Danglars,
whose beautiful eyes sparkled for a moment. “The paths of which you were
just speaking have been traced by all young men of ardent imaginations.
Besides the pleasure, there is always remorse from the indulgence of our
passions, and, after all, what have you men to fear from all this? the
world excuses, and notoriety ennobles you.”

“In any case, sir, you will allow,” replied Madame Danglars, “that, even
if the fault were alone mine, I last night received a severe punishment
for it.”

“Ah,” exclaimed Madame Danglars, alarmed, “what is there more to hear?”

“What can you mean?” asked Madame Danglars, shuddering.

“Neither of them there?” repeated Madame Danglars, her staring, wide-
open eyes expressing her alarm. “Neither of them there!” she again said,
as though striving to impress herself with the meaning of the words
which escaped her.

Madame Danglars moved rapidly, as though she would spring from her
chair, but Villefort stopped, and clasped his hands as if to implore her
attention.

“We thought it dead,” he repeated; “I placed it in the chest, which was
to take the place of a coffin; I descended to the garden, I dug a hole,
and then flung it down in haste. Scarcely had I covered it with earth,
when the arm of the Corsican was stretched towards me; I saw a shadow
rise, and, at the same time, a flash of light. I felt pain; I wished to
cry out, but an icy shiver ran through my veins and stifled my voice; I
fell lifeless, and fancied myself killed. Never shall I forget your
sublime courage, when, having returned to consciousness, I dragged
myself to the foot of the stairs, and you, almost dying yourself, came
to meet me. We were obliged to keep silent upon the dreadful
catastrophe. You had the fortitude to regain the house, assisted by your
nurse. A duel was the pretext for my wound. Though we scarcely expected
it, our secret remained in our own keeping alone. I was taken to
Versailles; for three months I struggled with death; at last, as I
seemed to cling to life, I was ordered to the South. Four men carried me
from Paris to Châlons, walking six leagues a day; Madame de Villefort
followed the litter in her carriage. At Châlons I was put upon the
Saône, thence I passed on to the Rhône, whence I descended, merely with
the current, to Arles; at Arles I was again placed on my litter, and
continued my journey to Marseilles. My recovery lasted six months. I
never heard you mentioned, and I did not dare inquire for you. When I
returned to Paris, I learned that you, the widow of M. de Nargonne, had
married M. Danglars.

“The chest no longer there?” murmured Madame Danglars, choking with
fear.

“Oh,” cried Madame Danglars, “it was enough to drive you mad!”

“But you said,” replied Madame Danglars, “he would require it as a
proof.”

Madame Danglars uttered a piercing cry, and, seizing Villefort’s hands,
exclaimed, “My child was alive?” said she; “you buried my child alive?
You were not certain my child was dead, and you buried it? Ah——”

Madame Danglars had risen, and stood before the procureur, whose hands
she wrung in her feeble grasp.

“Ah, my child, my poor child!” cried the baroness, falling on her chair,
and stifling her sobs in her handkerchief. Villefort, becoming somewhat
reassured, perceived that to avert the maternal storm gathering over his
head, he must inspire Madame Danglars with the terror he felt.

“Just God, avenging God!” murmured Madame Danglars.

“Impossible!” cried Madame Danglars: “a man may murder another out of
revenge, but he would not deliberately drown a child.”

“Truly, truly,” said Madame Danglars, “all my linen is marked thus;
Monsieur de Nargonne was a baron, and my name is Hermine. Thank God, my
child was not then dead!”

Madame Danglars had listened to this recital with a sigh, a tear, or a
shriek for every detail. “And this is all?” said she; “and you stopped
there?”

“But,” replied Madame Danglars, “the Count of Monte Cristo can know
nothing, or he would not seek our society as he does.”

Villefort pronounced these words with an accent which would have made
the count shudder had he heard him. Then he pressed the hand the
baroness reluctantly gave him, and led her respectfully back to the
door. Madame Danglars returned in another cab to the passage, on the
other side of which she found her carriage, and her coachman sleeping
peacefully on his box while waiting for her.

The same day during the interview between Madame Danglars and the
procureur, a travelling-carriage entered the Rue du Helder, passed
through the gateway of No. 27, and stopped in the yard. In a moment the
door was opened, and Madame de Morcerf alighted, leaning on her son’s
arm. Albert soon left her, ordered his horses, and having arranged his
toilet, drove to the Champs-Élysées, to the house of Monte Cristo.

“Willingly. M. Danglars dined with me.”

“What a strange man you are! What next? You say M. Danglars dined here?”

“Yes, with Count Cavalcanti, the marquis his father, Madame Danglars, M.
and Madame de Villefort,—charming people,—M. Debray, Maximilian Morrel,
and M. de Château-Renaud.”

“How will that affect you, since Mademoiselle Danglars was not among the
number here who thought of you? Truly, she might have thought of you at
home.”

“Listen,” said Morcerf—“if Mademoiselle Danglars were disposed to take
pity on my supposed martyrdom on her account, and would dispense with
all matrimonial formalities between our two families, I am ready to
agree to the arrangement. In a word, Mademoiselle Danglars would make a
charming mistress—but a wife—diable!”

“Yes; it is rather unkind, I acknowledge, but it is true. But as this
dream cannot be realized, since Mademoiselle Danglars must become my
lawful wife, live perpetually with me, sing to me, compose verses and
music within ten paces of me, and that for my whole life, it frightens
me. One may forsake a mistress, but a wife,—good heavens! There she must
always be; and to marry Mademoiselle Danglars would be awful.”

“Such are my reasons for not liking to marry Mademoiselle Danglars. Have
you ever noticed how much a thing is heightened in value when we obtain
possession of it? The diamond which glittered in the window at Marlé’s
or Fossin’s shines with more splendor when it is our own; but if we are
compelled to acknowledge the superiority of another, and still must
retain the one that is inferior, do you not know what we have to
endure?”

“Thus I shall rejoice when Mademoiselle Eugénie perceives I am but a
pitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundred thousand francs as she has
millions.” Monte Cristo smiled. “One plan occurred to me,” continued
Albert; “Franz likes all that is eccentric; I tried to make him fall in
love with Mademoiselle Danglars; but in spite of four letters, written
in the most alluring style, he invariably answered: ‘My eccentricity may
be great, but it will not make me break my promise.’”

“Yes; summoned by M. de Villefort, who is apparently as anxious to get
Mademoiselle Valentine married as M. Danglars is to see Mademoiselle
Eugénie settled. It must be a very irksome office to be the father of a
grown-up daughter; it seems to make one feverish, and to raise one’s
pulse to ninety beats a minute until the deed is done.”

“There is, then, one,” said Monte Cristo, “whom you do not condemn like
poor Danglars?”

“Yes; pray take a cigar, and cease to defend yourself, and to struggle
to escape marrying Mademoiselle Danglars. Let things take their course;
perhaps you may not have to retract.”

“Then make yourself quite easy. M. Danglars would give double that sum
to attain the same end.”

“Am I, indeed, so happy?” said Albert, who still could not prevent an
almost imperceptible cloud passing across his brow. “But, my dear count,
has M. Danglars any reason?”

“But yet, M. Danglars appeared——”

“That is another thing: he was recommended to me by a good abbé, who may
be deceived. Give him a direct invitation, but do not ask me to present
him. If he were afterwards to marry Mademoiselle Danglars, you would
accuse me of intrigue, and would be challenging me,—besides, I may not
be there myself.”

“Will M. Danglars be there?”

“I have spoken to you indiscreetly about Danglars.”

M. de Villefort kept the promise he had made to Madame Danglars, to
endeavor to find out how the Count of Monte Cristo had discovered the
history of the house at Auteuil. He wrote the same day for the required
information to M. de Boville, who, from having been an inspector of
prisons, was promoted to a high office in the police; and the latter
begged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would be most likely
to give him full particulars. At the end of the second day M. de
Villefort received the following note:

Madame Danglars, in whom the events we have related had caused deep
anxiety, had hesitated about going to Madame de Morcerf’s, when during
the morning her carriage happened to meet that of Villefort. The latter
made a sign, and when the carriages had drawn close together, said:

“No,” replied Madame Danglars, “I am too ill.”

And the two carriages passed on towards their different destinations.
Madame Danglars therefore came, not only beautiful in person, but
radiant with splendor; she entered by one door at the time when Mercédès
appeared at the door. The countess took Albert to meet Madame Danglars.
He approached, paid her some well merited compliments on her toilet, and
offered his arm to conduct her to a seat. Albert looked around him.

Albert bowed to Madame Danglars, and advanced towards Madame de
Villefort, whose lips opened as he approached.

“Do not introduce me to any of these gentlemen; and should they wish it,
you will warn me.” Just then the count felt his arm pressed. He turned
round; it was Danglars.

“Why do you call me baron?” said Danglars; “you know that I care nothing
for my title. I am not like you, viscount; you like your title, do you
not?”

“Which seems to me the finest title under the royalty of July,” replied
Danglars.

“Indeed?” said Danglars, becoming pale.

“Ah, mon Dieu!” exclaimed Danglars, “they have drawn on me for 200,000
francs!”

“Yes, but it is too late,” said Danglars, “I have honored their bills.”

“Hush, do not mention these things,” said Danglars; then, approaching
Monte Cristo, he added, “especially before young M. Cavalcanti;” after
which he smiled, and turned towards the young man in question.

Albert had left the count to speak to his mother, Danglars to converse
with young Cavalcanti; Monte Cristo was for an instant alone. Meanwhile
the heat became excessive. The footmen were hastening through the rooms
with waiters loaded with ices. Monte Cristo wiped the perspiration from
his forehead, but drew back when the waiter was presented to him; he
took no refreshment. Madame de Morcerf did not lose sight of Monte
Cristo; she saw that he took nothing, and even noticed his gesture of
refusal.

“So Franz must wait. Why was not M. de Saint-Méran also grandfather to
Mademoiselle Danglars?”

Such was the state of society in Paris at the period we bring before our
readers, when Monte Cristo went one evening to pay M. Danglars a visit.
M. Danglars was out, but the count was asked to go and see the baroness,
and he accepted the invitation. It was never without a nervous shudder,
since the dinner at Auteuil, and the events which followed it, that
Madame Danglars heard Monte Cristo’s name announced. If he did not come,
the painful sensation became most intense; if, on the contrary, he
appeared, his noble countenance, his brilliant eyes, his amiability, his
polite attention even towards Madame Danglars, soon dispelled every
impression of fear. It appeared impossible to the baroness that a man of
such delightfully pleasing manners should entertain evil designs against
her; besides, the most corrupt minds only suspect evil when it would
answer some interested end—useless injury is repugnant to every mind.

The baroness was partially reclining on a sofa, Eugénie sat near her,
and Cavalcanti was standing. Cavalcanti, dressed in black, like one of
Goethe’s heroes, with varnished shoes and white silk open-worked
stockings, passed a white and tolerably nice-looking hand through his
light hair, and so displayed a sparkling diamond, that in spite of Monte
Cristo’s advice the vain young man had been unable to resist putting on
his little finger. This movement was accompanied by killing glances at
Mademoiselle Danglars, and by sighs launched in the same direction.

Mademoiselle Danglars was still the same—cold, beautiful, and satirical.
Not one of these glances, nor one sigh, was lost on her; they might have
been said to fall on the shield of Minerva, which some philosophers
assert protected sometimes the breast of Sappho. Eugénie bowed coldly to
the count, and availed herself of the first moment when the conversation
became earnest to escape to her study, whence very soon two cheerful and
noisy voices being heard in connection with occasional notes of the
piano assured Monte Cristo that Mademoiselle Danglars preferred to his
society and to that of M. Cavalcanti the company of Mademoiselle Louise
d’Armilly, her singing teacher.

It was then, especially while conversing with Madame Danglars, and
apparently absorbed by the charm of the conversation, that the count
noticed M. Andrea Cavalcanti’s solicitude, his manner of listening to
the music at the door he dared not pass, and of manifesting his
admiration.

“Have not the ladies invited you to join them at the piano?” said
Danglars to Andrea.

“Alas, no, sir,” replied Andrea with a sigh, still more remarkable than
the former ones. Danglars immediately advanced towards the door and
opened it.

He then led the young man into the study, and either by chance or
manœuvre the door was partially closed after Andrea, so that from the
place where they sat neither the Count nor the baroness could see
anything; but as the banker had accompanied Andrea, Madame Danglars
appeared to take no notice of it.

The count soon heard Andrea’s voice, singing a Corsican song,
accompanied by the piano. While the count smiled at hearing this song,
which made him lose sight of Andrea in the recollection of Benedetto,
Madame Danglars was boasting to Monte Cristo of her husband’s strength
of mind, who that very morning had lost three or four hundred thousand
francs by a failure at Milan. The praise was well deserved, for had not
the count heard it from the baroness, or by one of those means by which
he knew everything, the baron’s countenance would not have led him to
suspect it.

Then aloud,—“Oh, madame, M. Danglars is so skilful, he will soon regain
at the Bourse what he loses elsewhere.”

“I see that you participate in a prevalent error,” said Madame Danglars.

“That M. Danglars speculates, whereas he never does.”

“Nor I,” said Madame Danglars; “but you began a sentence, sir, and did
not finish.”

“Then you are wrong, madame. Fortune is precarious; and if I were a
woman and fate had made me a banker’s wife, whatever might be my
confidence in my husband’s good fortune, still in speculation you know
there is great risk. Well, I would secure for myself a fortune
independent of him, even if I acquired it by placing my interests in
hands unknown to him.” Madame Danglars blushed, in spite of all her
efforts.

Danglars returned at this moment alone.

The valet announced the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf. The baroness rose
hastily, and was going into the study, when Danglars stopped her.

She looked at him in amazement. Monte Cristo appeared to be unconscious
of what passed. Albert entered, looking very handsome and in high
spirits. He bowed politely to the baroness, familiarly to Danglars, and
affectionately to Monte Cristo. Then turning to the baroness: “May I ask
how Mademoiselle Danglars is?” said he.

“She is quite well,” replied Danglars quickly; “she is at the piano with
M. Cavalcanti.”

“They suit each other remarkably well,” said Danglars. Albert appeared
not to notice this remark, which was, however, so rude that Madame
Danglars blushed.

Danglars smiled, and seemed to say, “It is of no consequence.” Then,
hoping doubtless to effect his purpose, he said,—“The prince and my
daughter were universally admired yesterday. You were not of the party,
M. de Morcerf?”

“Prince Cavalcanti,” said Danglars, who persisted in giving the young
man that title.

“May I also be allowed,” said Morcerf, “to pay my respects to
Mademoiselle Danglars?”

“Indeed,” said Albert, “it is exquisite; it is impossible to understand
the music of his country better than Prince Cavalcanti does. You said
prince, did you not? But he can easily become one, if he is not already;
it is no uncommon thing in Italy. But to return to the charming
musicians—you should give us a treat, Danglars, without telling them
there is a stranger. Ask them to sing one more song; it is so delightful
to hear music in the distance, when the musicians are unrestrained by
observation.”

Danglars was quite annoyed by the young man’s indifference. He took
Monte Cristo aside.

“Hem,” said Danglars.

“Well, I acknowledge it annoys me, knowing your connection with the
Morcerf family, to see him throw himself in the way.” Danglars burst out
laughing.

“Oh, don’t worry about me, Sir Mocker,” said Danglars; then turning to
Monte Cristo he said:

“I do not say that I await with pleasure his decision, but I do await
it. A banker must, you know, be a slave to his promise.” And Danglars
sighed as M. Cavalcanti had done half an hour before.

“Bravi! bravo! brava!” cried Morcerf, parodying the banker, as the
selection came to an end. Danglars began to look suspiciously at
Morcerf, when someone came and whispered a few words to him.

The baroness took advantage of her husband’s absence to push open the
door of her daughter’s study, and M. Andrea, who was sitting before the
piano with Mademoiselle Eugénie, started up like a jack-in-the-box.
Albert bowed with a smile to Mademoiselle Danglars, who did not appear
in the least disturbed, and returned his bow with her usual coolness.
Cavalcanti was evidently embarrassed; he bowed to Morcerf, who replied
with the most impertinent look possible. Then Albert launched out in
praise of Mademoiselle Danglars’ voice, and on his regret, after what he
had just heard, that he had been unable to be present the previous
evening.

“Come,” said Madame Danglars, “leave music and compliments, and let us
go and take tea.”

“Come, Louise,” said Mademoiselle Danglars to her friend.

They passed into the next drawing-room, where tea was prepared. Just as
they were beginning, in the English fashion, to leave the spoons in
their cups, the door again opened and Danglars entered, visibly
agitated. Monte Cristo observed it particularly, and by a look asked the
banker for an explanation.

“I have just received my courier from Greece,” said Danglars.

Danglars cast another suspicious look towards him without answering, and
Monte Cristo turned away to conceal the expression of pity which passed
over his features, but which was gone in a moment.

“Stop,” said Albert, “here he comes. I shall compliment Mademoiselle
Danglars on her cameo, while the father talks to you.”

Meanwhile, Danglars, stooping to Monte Cristo’s ear, “Your advice was
excellent,” said he; “there is a whole history connected with the names
Fernand and Yanina.”

“Very well.” The count made a sign to Albert and they bowed to the
ladies, and took their leave, Albert perfectly indifferent to
Mademoiselle Danglars’ contempt, Monte Cristo reiterating his advice to
Madame Danglars on the prudence a banker’s wife should exercise in
providing for the future.

“To the installation of my rival at M. Danglars’.”

“Ah, no joking, viscount, if you please; I do not patronize M. Andrea—at
least, not as concerns M. Danglars.”

“I am certain of it; his languishing looks and modulated tones when
addressing Mademoiselle Danglars fully proclaim his intentions. He
aspires to the hand of the proud Eugénie.”

“But then, what can have led to the quarrel between Danglars and Debray?
They seemed to understand each other so well,” said Monte Cristo with
renewed energy.

“Ma foi, my dear viscount, you are fated to hear music this evening; you
have only escaped from Mademoiselle Danglars’ piano, to be attacked by
Haydée’s guzla.”

“Oh, that is charming,” said Albert, “how I should like to hear my
countrywomen called Mademoiselle Goodness, Mademoiselle Silence,
Mademoiselle Christian Charity! Only think, then, if Mademoiselle
Danglars, instead of being called Claire-Marie-Eugénie, had been named
Mademoiselle Chastity-Modesty-Innocence Danglars; what a fine effect
that would have produced on the announcement of her marriage!”

While all the proceedings relative to the dissolution of the marriage-
contract were being carried on at the house of M. de Villefort, Monte
Cristo had paid his visit to the Count of Morcerf, who, in order to lose
no time in responding to M. Danglars’ wishes, and at the same time to
pay all due deference to his position in society, donned his uniform of
lieutenant-general, which he ornamented with all his crosses, and thus
attired, ordered his finest horses and drove to the Rue de la Chaussée
d’Antin.

Danglars was balancing his monthly accounts, and it was perhaps not the
most favorable moment for finding him in his best humor. At the first
sight of his old friend, Danglars assumed his majestic air, and settled
himself in his easy-chair.

Morcerf paused at these words, quietly waiting till the cloud should
have dispersed which had gathered on the brow of Danglars, and which he
attributed to his silence; but, on the contrary, to his great surprise,
it grew darker and darker.

“To what do you allude, monsieur?” said Danglars; as if he were trying
in vain to guess at the possible meaning of the general’s words.

And Morcerf with a forced smile arose, and, making a low bow to M.
Danglars, said:

“Baron, I have the honor of asking of you the hand of Mademoiselle
Eugénie Danglars for my son, the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf.”

But Danglars, instead of receiving this address in the favorable manner
which Morcerf had expected, knit his brow, and without inviting the
count, who was still standing, to take a seat, he said:

“I see him very often,” said Danglars, drawing himself up; “he is a
particular friend of mine.”

Danglars did not answer.

Danglars, seeing that if he continued the conversation in the same tone
in which he had begun it, the whole thing might turn out to his own
disadvantage, turned to Morcerf, and said:

Danglars was a coward, but did not wish to appear so; he was piqued at
the tone which Morcerf had just assumed.

“No, sir,” said Danglars; “I merely suspend my decision, that is all.”

“My dear Danglars,” said Morcerf, “we have been acquainted for many
years, and consequently we ought to make some allowance for each other’s
failings. You owe me an explanation, and really it is but fair that I
should know what circumstance has occurred to deprive my son of your
favor.”

“It is from no personal ill-feeling towards the viscount, that is all I
can say, sir,” replied Danglars, who resumed his insolent manner as soon
as he perceived that Morcerf was a little softened and calmed down.

“Nothing of the kind, sir,” replied Danglars: “if such had been the
case, I only should have been to blame, inasmuch as I was aware of all
these things when I made the engagement. No, do not seek any longer to
discover the reason. I really am quite ashamed to have been the cause of
your undergoing such severe self-examination; let us drop the subject,
and adopt the middle course of delay, which implies neither a rupture
nor an engagement. Ma foi, there is no hurry. My daughter is only
seventeen years old, and your son twenty-one. While we wait, time will
be progressing, events will succeed each other; things which in the
evening look dark and obscure, appear but too clearly in the light of
morning, and sometimes the utterance of one word, or the lapse of a
single day, will reveal the most cruel calumnies.”

And clutching his gloves in anger, he left the apartment. Danglars
observed that during the whole conversation Morcerf had never once dared
to ask if it was on his own account that Danglars recalled his word.

The next morning, as soon as he awoke, Danglars asked for the
newspapers; they were brought to him; he laid aside three or four, and
at last fixed on l’Impartial, the paper of which Beauchamp was the chief
editor. He hastily tore off the cover, opened the journal with nervous
precipitation, passed contemptuously over the Paris jottings, and
arriving at the miscellaneous intelligence, stopped with a malicious
smile, at a paragraph headed

“Very good,” observed Danglars, after having read the paragraph; “here
is a little article on Colonel Fernand, which, if I am not mistaken,
would render the explanation which the Comte de Morcerf required of me
perfectly unnecessary.”

The evening of the day on which the Count of Morcerf had left Danglars’
house with feelings of shame and anger at the rejection of the projected
alliance, M. Andrea Cavalcanti, with curled hair, moustaches in perfect
order, and white gloves which fitted admirably, had entered the
courtyard of the banker’s house in Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin. He had
not been more than ten minutes in the drawing-room before he drew
Danglars aside into the recess of a bow-window, and, after an ingenious
preamble, related to him all his anxieties and cares since his noble
father’s departure. He acknowledged the extreme kindness which had been
shown him by the banker’s family, in which he had been received as a
son, and where, besides, his warmest affections had found an object on
which to centre in Mademoiselle Danglars.

Danglars listened with the most profound attention; he had expected this
declaration for the last two or three days, and when at last it came his
eyes glistened as much as they had lowered on listening to Morcerf. He
would not, however, yield immediately to the young man’s request, but
made a few conscientious objections.

“Well, sir,” said Danglars, “in case your proposals, which do me honor,
are accepted by my wife and daughter, by whom shall the preliminary
arrangements be settled? So important a negotiation should, I think, be
conducted by the respective fathers of the young people.”

“I,” said Danglars, “have always intended giving my daughter 500,000
francs as her dowry; she is, besides, my sole heiress.”

“But,” said Danglars, who, on his part, did not perceive how soon the
conversation, which was at first disinterested, was turning to a
business transaction, “there is, doubtless, a part of your fortune your
father could not refuse you?”

Danglars felt as much overcome with joy as the miser who finds a lost
treasure, or as the shipwrecked mariner who feels himself on solid
ground instead of in the abyss which he expected would swallow him up.

“You may not only hope,” said Danglars, “but consider it a settled
thing, if no obstacle arises on your part.”

“But,” said Danglars thoughtfully, “how is it that your patron, M. de
Monte Cristo, did not make his proposal for you?”

“And what may you have to say to him?” said Danglars, laughing in his
turn.

“Bring me a million such as that,” said Danglars, “I shall be well
pleased,” putting the draft in his pocket. “Fix your own hour for
tomorrow, and my cashier shall call on you with a check for eighty
thousand francs.”

“It is humiliating,” said he, “thus to receive money given
grudgingly,—an uncertain supply which may soon fail. You see I am
obliged to economize, in case your prosperity should cease. Well, my
friend, fortune is inconstant, as the chaplain of the regiment said. I
know your prosperity is great, you rascal; you are to marry the daughter
of Danglars.”

“What? of Danglars?”

“Yes, to be sure; must I say Baron Danglars? I might as well say Count
Benedetto. He was an old friend of mine and if he had not so bad a
memory he ought to invite me to your wedding, seeing he came to mine.
Yes, yes, to mine; gad, he was not so proud then,—he was an under-clerk
to the good M. Morrel. I have dined many times with him and the Count of
Morcerf, so you see I have some high connections and were I to cultivate
them a little, we might meet in the same drawing-rooms.”

“Well, I hope you will make a handsome wedding-present the day you marry
Mademoiselle Danglars.”

“Is it, then, that young man whom my friend the Count of Monte Cristo
has received into his house, and who is going to marry Mademoiselle
Danglars?”

“You are right; it is not you who should apprise M. Danglars, it is I.”

“To M. Danglars.”

“The address, ‘To monsieur the Baron Danglars, banker, Rue de la
Chaussée d’Antin.’”

But three weeks had already passed, and the most diligent search had
been unsuccessful; the attempted robbery and the murder of the robber by
his comrade were almost forgotten in anticipation of the approaching
marriage of Mademoiselle Danglars to the Count Andrea Cavalcanti. It was
expected that this wedding would shortly take place, as the young man
was received at the banker’s as the betrothed.

Letters had been despatched to M. Cavalcanti, as the count’s father, who
highly approved of the union, regretted his inability to leave Parma at
that time, and promised a wedding gift of a hundred and fifty thousand
livres. It was agreed that the three millions should be intrusted to
Danglars to invest; some persons had warned the young man of the
circumstances of his future father-in-law, who had of late sustained
repeated losses; but with sublime disinterestedness and confidence the
young man refused to listen, or to express a single doubt to the baron.

The baron adored Count Andrea Cavalcanti; not so Mademoiselle Eugénie
Danglars. With an instinctive hatred of matrimony, she suffered Andrea’s
attentions in order to get rid of Morcerf; but when Andrea urged his
suit, she betrayed an entire dislike to him. The baron might possibly
have perceived it, but, attributing it to a caprice, feigned ignorance.

“Are you going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?”

“How?” said Albert, whose brow reddened; “you think M. Danglars——”

“And who,” said Albert with a forced smile, “is to marry Mademoiselle
Danglars instead of me, which grieves me cruelly.”

“What? Cavalcanti is going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?” asked
Beauchamp.

“Oh, yes, in spite of all I could say. I do not know the young man; he
is said to be of good family and rich, but I never trust to vague
assertions. I have warned M. Danglars of it till I am tired, but he is
fascinated with his Luccanese. I have even informed him of a
circumstance I consider very serious; the young man was either charmed
by his nurse, stolen by gypsies, or lost by his tutor, I scarcely know
which. But I do know his father lost sight of him for more than ten
years; what he did during these ten years, God only knows. Well, all
that was useless. They have commissioned me to write to the major to
demand papers, and here they are. I send them, but like Pilate—washing
my hands.”

“Oh, well, I don’t know; but I understand that she is going to Italy.
Madame Danglars asked me for letters of recommendation for the
impresari; I gave her a few lines for the director of the Valle Theatre,
who is under some obligation to me. But what is the matter, Albert? you
look dull; are you, after all, unconsciously in love with Mademoiselle
Eugénie?”

“Some Provençal, it appears. M. de Villefort heard of him at Marseilles,
and M. Danglars recollects having seen him. Consequently, the procureur
is very active in the affair, and the prefect of police very much
interested; and, thanks to that interest, for which I am very grateful,
they send me all the robbers of Paris and the neighborhood, under
pretence of their being Caderousse’s murderers, so that in three months,
if this continues, every robber and assassin in France will have the
plan of my house at his fingers’ ends. I am resolved to desert them and
go to some remote corner of the earth, and shall be happy if you will
accompany me, viscount.”

“‘Danglars.’”

“Oh, do not fear; besides, you will accompany me. Beauchamp, solemn
transactions should be sanctioned by a witness. Before this day closes,
if M. Danglars is guilty, he shall cease to live, or I shall die.
Pardieu, Beauchamp, mine shall be a splendid funeral!”

“When such resolutions are made, Albert, they should be promptly
executed. Do you wish to go to M. Danglars? Let us go immediately.”

“Ah! parbleu! that’s good,” said Albert, with a gloomy tone. “If M.
Danglars will not fight with me, I will kill his son-in-law; Cavalcanti
will certainly fight.”

Danglars turned pale; Cavalcanti moved a step forward, and Albert turned
towards him.

Cavalcanti looked at Danglars with a stupefied air, and the latter,
making an effort, arose and stepped between the two young men. Albert’s
attack on Andrea had placed him on a different footing, and he hoped
this visit had another cause than that he had at first supposed.

“You mistake, sir,” said Morcerf with a gloomy smile; “I am not
referring in the least to matrimony, and I only addressed myself to M.
Cavalcanti because he appeared disposed to interfere between us. In one
respect you are right, for I am ready to quarrel with everyone today;
but you have the first claim, M. Danglars.”

“Sir,” replied Danglars, pale with anger and fear, “I warn you, when I
have the misfortune to meet with a mad dog, I kill it; and far from
thinking myself guilty of a crime, I believe I do society a kindness.
Now, if you are mad and try to bite me, I will kill you without pity. Is
it my fault that your father has dishonored himself?”

Danglars retreated a few steps. “My fault?” said he; “you must be mad!
What do I know of the Grecian affair? Have I travelled in that country?
Did I advise your father to sell the castle of Yanina—to betray——”

“I, indeed? I assure you,” cried Danglars, with a confidence and
security proceeding less from fear than from the interest he really felt
for the young man, “I solemnly declare to you, that I should never have
thought of writing to Yanina, did I know anything of Ali Pasha’s
misfortunes.”

“I accuse no one, sir,” said Danglars; “I relate, and I will repeat
before the count what I have said to you.”

Albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was no doubt upon the
subject. Danglars defended himself with the baseness, but at the same
time with the assurance, of a man who speaks the truth, at least in
part, if not wholly—not for conscience’ sake, but through fear. Besides,
what was Morcerf seeking? It was not whether Danglars or Monte Cristo
was more or less guilty; it was a man who would answer for the offence,
whether trifling or serious; it was a man who would fight, and it was
evident Danglars would not fight.

In addition to this, everything forgotten or unperceived before
presented itself now to his recollection. Monte Cristo knew everything,
as he had bought the daughter of Ali Pasha; and, knowing everything, he
had advised Danglars to write to Yanina. The answer known, he had
yielded to Albert’s wish to be introduced to Haydée, and allowed the
conversation to turn on the death of Ali, and had not opposed Haydée’s
recital (but having, doubtless, warned the young girl, in the few Romaic
words he spoke to her, not to implicate Morcerf’s father). Besides, had
he not begged of Morcerf not to mention his father’s name before Haydée?
Lastly, he had taken Albert to Normandy when he knew the final blow was
near. There could be no doubt that all had been calculated and
previously arranged; Monte Cristo then was in league with his father’s
enemies. Albert took Beauchamp aside, and communicated these ideas to
him.

“You are right,” said the latter; “M. Danglars has only been a secondary
agent in this sad affair, and it is of M. de Monte Cristo that you must
demand an explanation.”

“Sir,” said he to Danglars, “understand that I do not take a final leave
of you; I must ascertain if your insinuations are just, and am going now
to inquire of the Count of Monte Cristo.”

He bowed to the banker, and went out with Beauchamp, without appearing
to notice Cavalcanti. Danglars accompanied him to the door, where he
again assured Albert that no motive of personal hatred had influenced
him against the Count of Morcerf.

“Is it more serious than going to M. Danglars?”

“Yes; M. Danglars is a money-lover, and those who love money, you know,
think too much of what they risk to be easily induced to fight a duel.
The other is, on the contrary, to all appearance a true nobleman; but do
you not fear to find him a bully?”

“You do not, madame; at least, I hope not. But I will tell you. I was
arrested and became a prisoner because, under the arbor of La Réserve,
the day before I was to marry you, a man named Danglars wrote this
letter, which the fisherman Fernand himself posted.”

Monte Cristo went to a secretaire, opened a drawer by a spring, from
which he took a paper which had lost its original color, and the ink of
which had become of a rusty hue—this he placed in the hands of Mercédès.
It was Danglars’ letter to the king’s attorney, which the Count of Monte
Cristo, disguised as a clerk from the house of Thomson & French, had
taken from the file against Edmond Dantès, on the day he had paid the
two hundred thousand francs to M. de Boville. Mercédès read with terror
the following lines:

“I do this, Oh, my God,” said he, with his eyes raised to heaven, “as
much for thy honor as for mine. I have during ten years considered
myself the agent of thy vengeance, and other wretches, like Morcerf,
Danglars, Villefort, even Morcerf himself, must not imagine that chance
has freed them from their enemy. Let them know, on the contrary, that
their punishment, which had been decreed by Providence, is only delayed
by my present determination, and although they escape it in this world,
it awaits them in another, and that they are only exchanging time for
eternity.”

“Cheer up,” said she to Noirtier. “Do not be alarmed, Maximilian; it is
nothing, and has already passed away. But listen! Do I not hear a
carriage in the courtyard?” She opened Noirtier’s door, ran to a window
in the passage, and returned hastily. “Yes,” said she, “it is Madame
Danglars and her daughter, who have come to call on us. Good-bye;—I must
run away, for they would send here for me, or, rather, farewell till I
see you again. Stay with grandpapa, Maximilian; I promise you not to
persuade them to stay.”

It was indeed Madame Danglars and her daughter whom Valentine had seen;
they had been ushered into Madame de Villefort’s room, who had said she
would receive them there. That is why Valentine passed through her room,
which was on a level with Valentine’s, and only separated from it by
Edward’s. The two ladies entered the drawing-room with that sort of
official stiffness which preludes a formal communication. Among worldly
people manner is contagious. Madame de Villefort received them with
equal solemnity. Valentine entered at this moment, and the formalities
were resumed.

“My dear friend,” said the baroness, while the two young people were
shaking hands, “I and Eugénie are come to be the first to announce to
you the approaching marriage of my daughter with Prince Cavalcanti.”
Danglars kept up the title of prince. The popular banker found that it
answered better than count.

“Listen,” said the baroness, smiling; “speaking to you as a friend I can
say that the prince does not yet appear all he will be. He has about him
a little of that foreign manner by which French persons recognize, at
first sight, the Italian or German nobleman. Besides, he gives evidence
of great kindness of disposition, much keenness of wit, and as to
suitability, M. Danglars assures me that his fortune is majestic—that is
his word.”

“It is true,” said the baroness, with that strange simplicity sometimes
met with among fashionable ladies, and of which plebeian intercourse can
never entirely deprive them,—“it is very true that had not the Morcerfs
hesitated, my daughter would have married Monsieur Albert. The general
depended much on it; he even came to force M. Danglars. We have had a
narrow escape.”

“Ah, my dear friend,” said Madame Danglars, with the same simplicity we
before noticed, “it is a fact. I heard it from M. Debray, who was
present at the explanation.”

Valentine also knew the truth, but she did not answer. A single word had
reminded her that Morrel was expecting her in M. Noirtier’s room. Deeply
engaged with a sort of inward contemplation, Valentine had ceased for a
moment to join in the conversation. She would, indeed, have found it
impossible to repeat what had been said the last few minutes, when
suddenly Madame Danglars’ hand, pressed on her arm, aroused her from her
lethargy.

“What is it?” said she, starting at Madame Danglars’ touch as she would
have done from an electric shock.

Valentine kissed Eugénie, bowed to Madame Danglars, who had already
risen to take her leave, and went out.

She burst into a forced and melancholy laugh, her arms stiffened and
twisted, her head fell back on her chair, and she remained motionless.
The cry of terror which was stopped on Noirtier’s lips, seemed to start
from his eyes. Morrel understood it; he knew he must call assistance.
The young man rang the bell violently; the housemaid who had been in
Mademoiselle Valentine’s room, and the servant who had replaced Barrois,
ran in at the same moment. Valentine was so pale, so cold, so inanimate
that without listening to what was said to them they were seized with
the fear which pervaded that house, and they flew into the passage
crying for help. Madame Danglars and Eugénie were going out at that
moment; they heard the cause of the disturbance.

We saw in a preceding chapter how Madame Danglars went formally to
announce to Madame de Villefort the approaching marriage of Eugénie
Danglars and M. Andrea Cavalcanti. This formal announcement, which
implied or appeared to imply, the approval of all the persons concerned
in this momentous affair, had been preceded by a scene to which our
readers must be admitted. We beg them to take one step backward, and to
transport themselves, the morning of that day of great catastrophes,
into the showy, gilded salon we have before shown them, and which was
the pride of its owner, Baron Danglars.

Having given this vent to his ill-humor, the baron became more calm;
Mademoiselle Danglars had that morning requested an interview with her
father, and had fixed on the gilded drawing-room as the spot. The
singularity of this step, and above all its formality, had not a little
surprised the banker, who had immediately obeyed his daughter by
repairing first to the drawing-room. Étienne soon returned from his
errand.

Danglars nodded, to signify that he was satisfied. To the world and to
his servants Danglars assumed the character of the good-natured man and
the indulgent father. This was one of his parts in the popular comedy he
was performing,—a make-up he had adopted and which suited him about as
well as the masks worn on the classic stage by paternal actors, who seen
from one side, were the image of geniality, and from the other showed
lips drawn down in chronic ill-temper. Let us hasten to say that in
private the genial side descended to the level of the other, so that
generally the indulgent man disappeared to give place to the brutal
husband and domineering father.

“Very well,” replied M. Danglars, who had listened to all this preamble
with imperturbable coolness, but without understanding a word, since
like every man burdened with thoughts of the past, he was occupied with
seeking the thread of his own ideas in those of the speaker.

Danglars leaped from his chair and raised his eyes and arms towards
heaven.

“Well?” asked Danglars.

“But,” said Danglars, whose weak mind was at first quite overwhelmed
with the weight of this pitiless logic, marking evident premeditation
and force of will, “what is your reason for this refusal, Eugénie? what
reason do you assign?”

“Unhappy girl, unhappy girl!” murmured Danglars, turning pale, for he
knew from long experience the solidity of the obstacle he had so
suddenly encountered.

Danglars, seeing his daughter smiling, and proud even to insolence,
could not entirely repress his brutal feelings, but they betrayed
themselves only by an exclamation. Under the fixed and inquiring gaze
levelled at him from under those beautiful black eyebrows, he prudently
turned away, and calmed himself immediately, daunted by the power of a
resolute mind.

Eugénie looked at Danglars, much surprised that one flower of her crown
of pride, with which she had so superbly decked herself, should be
disputed.

“My daughter,” continued Danglars, “when a father asks his daughter to
choose a husband, he has always some reason for wishing her to marry.
Some are affected with the mania of which you spoke just now, that of
living again in their grandchildren. This is not my weakness, I tell you
at once; family joys have no charm for me. I may acknowledge this to a
daughter whom I know to be philosophical enough to understand my
indifference, and not to impute it to me as a crime.”

“Oh,” said Danglars, “I can, when circumstances render it desirable,
adopt your system, although it may not be my general practice. I will
therefore proceed. I have proposed to you to marry, not for your sake,
for indeed I did not think of you in the least at the moment (you admire
candor, and will now be satisfied, I hope); but because it suited me to
marry you as soon as possible, on account of certain commercial
speculations I am desirous of entering into.” Eugénie became uneasy.

“Exactly, my daughter; that is precisely what I mean,” said Danglars,
almost digging his nails into his breast, while he preserved on his
harsh features the smile of the heartless though clever man;
“ruined—yes, that is it.”

“Do you think that I sorrow for Madame Danglars? Undeceive yourself
again; either I am greatly mistaken, or she has provided against the
catastrophe which threatens you, and, which will pass over without
affecting her. She has taken care for herself,—at least I hope so,—for
her attention has not been diverted from her projects by watching over
me. She has fostered my independence by professedly indulging my love
for liberty. Oh, no, sir; from my childhood I have seen too much, and
understood too much, of what has passed around me, for misfortune to
have an undue power over me. From my earliest recollections, I have been
beloved by no one—so much the worse; that has naturally led me to love
no one—so much the better—now you have my profession of faith.”

“Then,” said Danglars, pale with anger, which was not at all due to
offended paternal love,—“then, mademoiselle, you persist in your
determination to accelerate my ruin?”

“M. Cavalcanti,” continued Danglars, “is about to marry you, and will
place in my hands his fortune, amounting to three million livres.”

“You think I shall deprive you of those three millions,” said Danglars;
“but do not fear it. They are destined to produce at least ten. I and a
brother banker have obtained a grant of a railway, the only industrial
enterprise which in these days promises to make good the fabulous
prospects that Law once held out to the eternally deluded Parisians, in
the fantastic Mississippi scheme. As I look at it, a millionth part of a
railway is worth fully as much as an acre of waste land on the banks of
the Ohio. We make in our case a deposit, on a mortgage, which is an
advance, as you see, since we gain at least ten, fifteen, twenty, or a
hundred livres’ worth of iron in exchange for our money. Well, within a
week I am to deposit four millions for my share; the four millions, I
promise you, will produce ten or twelve.”

“But since I tell you,” cried Danglars, “that with these three
million——”

Danglars bit his lips. “Then,” said he, “you are ready to pay the
official visits, which are absolutely indispensable?”

Danglars pressed his daughter’s hand in his. But, extraordinary to
relate, the father did not say, “Thank you, my child,” nor did the
daughter smile at her father.

Danglars motioned that he had nothing more to say. Five minutes
afterwards the piano resounded to the touch of Mademoiselle d’Armilly’s
fingers, and Mademoiselle Danglars was singing Brabantio’s malediction
on Desdemona. At the end of the piece Étienne entered, and announced to
Eugénie that the horses were to the carriage, and that the baroness was
waiting for her to pay her visits. We have seen them at Villefort’s;
they proceeded then on their course.

Three days after the scene we have just described, namely towards five
o’clock in the afternoon of the day fixed for the signature of the
contract between Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars and Andrea Cavalcanti,
whom the banker persisted in calling prince, a fresh breeze was stirring
the leaves in the little garden in front of the Count of Monte Cristo’s
house, and the count was preparing to go out. While his horses were
impatiently pawing the ground, held in by the coachman, who had been
seated a quarter of an hour on his box, the elegant phaeton with which
we are familiar rapidly turned the angle of the entrance-gate, and cast
out on the doorsteps M. Andrea Cavalcanti, as decked up and gay as if he
were going to marry a princess.

“What; is it news to you? Has not M. Danglars informed you of the
ceremony?”

“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “you are fortunate, M. Cavalcanti; it is a
most suitable alliance you are contracting, and Mademoiselle Danglars is
a handsome girl.”

“Doubtless; it is said M. Danglars conceals at least half of his
fortune.”

“Without reckoning,” replied Monte Cristo, “that all his fortune will
come to you, and justly too, since Mademoiselle Danglars is an only
daughter. Besides, your own fortune, as your father assured me, is
almost equal to that of your betrothed. But enough of money matters. Do
you know, M. Andrea, I think you have managed this affair rather
skilfully?”

“Very true, but you introduced me at M. Danglars’.”

“That is the sum M. Danglars himself announced.”

“Well,” replied Monte Cristo, “it will be the way, everybody says, of
trebling your fortune in twelve months. Baron Danglars is a good father,
and knows how to calculate.”

The four or five remaining hours before nine o’clock arrived, Andrea
employed in riding, paying visits,—designed to induce those of whom he
had spoken to appear at the banker’s in their gayest equipages,—dazzling
them by promises of shares in schemes which have since turned every
brain, and in which Danglars was just taking the initiative.

Madame Danglars was chatting at a short distance with Debray, Beauchamp,
and Château-Renaud. Debray was admitted to the house for this grand
ceremony, but on the same plane with everyone else, and without any
particular privilege. M. Danglars, surrounded by deputies and men
connected with the revenue, was explaining a new theory of taxation
which he intended to adopt when the course of events had compelled the
government to call him into the ministry. Andrea, on whose arm hung one
of the most consummate dandies of the Opera, was explaining to him
rather cleverly, since he was obliged to be bold to appear at ease, his
future projects, and the new luxuries he meant to introduce to Parisian
fashions with his hundred and seventy-five thousand livres per annum.

A circle was immediately formed around the door. The count perceived at
one glance Madame Danglars at one end of the drawing-room, M. Danglars
at the other, and Eugénie in front of him. He first advanced towards the
baroness, who was chatting with Madame de Villefort, who had come alone,
Valentine being still an invalid; and without turning aside, so clear
was the road left for him, he passed from the baroness to Eugénie, whom
he complimented in such rapid and measured terms, that the proud artist
was quite struck. Near her was Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, who
thanked the count for the letters of introduction he had so kindly given
her for Italy, which she intended immediately to make use of. On leaving
these ladies he found himself with Danglars, who had advanced to meet
him.

Andrea, who was in an adjoining room, had shared in the sensation caused
by the arrival of Monte Cristo, and now came forward to pay his respects
to the count. He found him completely surrounded; all were eager to
speak to him, as is always the case with those whose words are few and
weighty. The solicitors arrived at this moment and arranged their
scrawled papers on the velvet cloth embroidered with gold which covered
the table prepared for the signature; it was a gilt table supported on
lions’ claws. One of the notaries sat down, the other remained standing.
They were about to proceed to the reading of the contract, which half
Paris assembled was to sign. All took their places, or rather the ladies
formed a circle, while the gentlemen (more indifferent to the restraints
of what Boileau calls the style énergique) commented on the feverish
agitation of Andrea, on M. Danglars’ riveted attention, Eugénie’s
composure, and the light and sprightly manner in which the baroness
treated this important affair.

Mademoiselle Danglars’ charms were heightened in the opinion of the
young men, and for the moment seemed to outvie the sun in splendor. As
for the ladies, it is needless to say that while they coveted the
millions, they thought they did not need them for themselves, as they
were beautiful enough without them. Andrea, surrounded by his friends,
complimented, flattered, beginning to believe in the reality of his
dream, was almost bewildered. The notary solemnly took the pen,
flourished it above his head, and said:

“Indeed?” said M. Danglars, in the same tone in which he would have
said, “Oh, well, what do I care?”

“What, you, count?” said Madame Danglars, signing; “if you are, take
care, for I shall never forgive you.”

“Yes,” said Danglars.

“To me?” cried Danglars.

“But,” asked Madame Danglars, looking at her husband with uneasiness,
“how could that prevent M. de Villefort——”

“Possibly,” said Danglars; “was not this murdered man an old galley-
slave?”

“Yes,” replied the count; “a felon named Caderousse.” Danglars turned
slightly pale; Andrea reached the anteroom beyond the little drawing-
room.

“But go on signing,” said Monte Cristo; “I perceive that my story has
caused a general emotion, and I beg to apologize to you, baroness, and
to Mademoiselle Danglars.”

“Call the prince; inform him that it is his turn to sign,” cried
Danglars to one of the floorkeepers.

But at the same instant the crowd of guests rushed in alarm into the
principal salon as if some frightful monster had entered the apartments,
quærens quem devoret. There was, indeed, reason to retreat, to be
alarmed, and to scream. An officer was placing two soldiers at the door
of each drawing-room, and was advancing towards Danglars, preceded by a
commissary of police, girded with his scarf. Madame Danglars uttered a
scream and fainted. Danglars, who thought himself threatened (certain
consciences are never calm),—Danglars even before his guests showed a
countenance of abject terror.

“But who then is Andrea Cavalcanti?” asked Danglars in amazement.

A few minutes after the scene of confusion produced in the salons of M.
Danglars by the unexpected appearance of the brigade of soldiers, and by
the disclosure which had followed, the mansion was deserted with as much
rapidity as if a case of plague or of cholera morbus had broken out
among the guests.

In a few minutes, through all the doors, down all the staircases, by
every exit, everyone hastened to retire, or rather to fly; for it was a
situation where the ordinary condolences,—which even the best friends
are so eager to offer in great catastrophes,—were seen to be utterly
futile. There remained in the banker’s house only Danglars, closeted in
his study, and making his statement to the officer of gendarmes; Madame
Danglars, terrified, in the boudoir with which we are acquainted; and
Eugénie, who with haughty air and disdainful lip had retired to her room
with her inseparable companion, Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.

As for the numerous servants (more numerous that evening than usual, for
their number was augmented by cooks and butlers from the Café de Paris),
venting on their employers their anger at what they termed the insult to
which they had been subjected, they collected in groups in the hall, in
the kitchens, or in their rooms, thinking very little of their duty,
which was thus naturally interrupted. Of all this household, only two
persons deserve our notice; these are Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars and
Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.

“Stop!” said Louise, going to listen at Madame Danglars’ door.

These words were lost in the noise which the carriage made in rolling
over the pavement of La Villette. M. Danglars no longer had a daughter.

And now let us leave Mademoiselle Danglars and her friend pursuing their
way to Brussels, and return to poor Andrea Cavalcanti, so inopportunely
interrupted in his rise to fortune. Notwithstanding his youth, Master
Andrea was a very skilful and intelligent boy. We have seen that on the
first rumor which reached the salon he had gradually approached the
door, and crossing two or three rooms at last disappeared. But we have
forgotten to mention one circumstance, which nevertheless ought not to
be omitted; in one of the rooms he crossed, the trousseau of the bride-
elect was on exhibition. There were caskets of diamonds, cashmere
shawls, Valenciennes lace, English veils, and in fact all the tempting
things, the bare mention of which makes the hearts of young girls bound
with joy, and which is called the corbeille.22 Now, in passing through
this room, Andrea proved himself not only to be clever and intelligent,
but also provident, for he helped himself to the most valuable of the
ornaments before him.

The calash contained Mademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle d’Armilly.

Once past the frontier, Andrea proposed making money of his diamonds;
and by uniting the proceeds to ten bank-notes he always carried about
with him in case of accident, he would then find himself possessor of
about 50,000 livres, which he philosophically considered as no very
deplorable condition after all. Moreover, he reckoned much on the
interest of the Danglars to hush up the rumor of their own
misadventures. These were the reasons which, added to the fatigue,
caused Andrea to sleep so soundly. In order that he might wake early he
did not close the shutters, but contented himself with bolting the door
and placing on the table an unclasped and long-pointed knife, whose
temper he well knew, and which was never absent from him.

“Eugénie! Mademoiselle Danglars!” exclaimed Andrea, stupefied.

“Why, you said,” answered Mademoiselle Danglars, “that you would be
condemned to die like the worst criminals.”

The two girls looked with horror upon this shameful metamorphosis, the
man of the world shaking off his covering and appearing as a galley-
slave. Andrea turned towards them, and with an impertinent smile asked,
“Have you any message for your father, Mademoiselle Danglars, for in all
probability I shall return to Paris?”

We have seen how quietly Mademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle
d’Armilly accomplished their transformation and flight; the fact being
that everyone was too much occupied in his or her own affairs to think
of theirs.

Now, Madame Danglars feared Eugénie’s sagacity and the influence of
Mademoiselle d’Armilly; she had frequently observed the contemptuous
expression with which her daughter looked upon Debray,—an expression
which seemed to imply that she understood all her mother’s amorous and
pecuniary relationships with the intimate secretary; moreover, she saw
that Eugénie detested Debray, not only because he was a source of
dissension and scandal under the paternal roof, but because she had at
once classed him in that catalogue of bipeds whom Plato endeavors to
withdraw from the appellation of men, and whom Diogenes designated as
animals upon two legs without feathers.

Unfortunately, in this world of ours, each person views things through a
certain medium, and so is prevented from seeing in the same light as
others, and Madame Danglars, therefore, very much regretted that the
marriage of Eugénie had not taken place, not only because the match was
good, and likely to insure the happiness of her child, but because it
would also set her at liberty. She ran therefore to Debray, who, after
having, like the rest of Paris, witnessed the contract scene and the
scandal attending it, had retired in haste to his club, where he was
chatting with some friends upon the events which served as a subject of
conversation for three-fourths of that city known as the capital of the
world.

At the precise time when Madame Danglars, dressed in black and concealed
in a long veil, was ascending the stairs leading to Debray’s apartments,
notwithstanding the assurances of the concierge that the young man was
not at home, Debray was occupied in repelling the insinuations of a
friend, who tried to persuade him that after the terrible scene which
had just taken place he ought, as a friend of the family, to marry
Mademoiselle Danglars and her two millions. Debray did not defend
himself very warmly, for the idea had sometimes crossed his mind; still,
when he recollected the independent, proud spirit of Eugénie, he
positively rejected it as utterly impossible, though the same thought
again continually recurred and found a resting-place in his heart. Tea,
play, and the conversation, which had become interesting during the
discussion of such serious affairs, lasted till one o’clock in the
morning.

Meanwhile Madame Danglars, veiled and uneasy, awaited the return of
Debray in the little green room, seated between two baskets of flowers,
which she had that morning sent, and which, it must be confessed, Debray
had himself arranged and watered with so much care that his absence was
half excused in the eyes of the poor woman.

At twenty minutes to twelve, Madame Danglars, tired of waiting, returned
home. Women of a certain grade are like prosperous grisettes in one
respect, they seldom return home after twelve o’clock. The baroness
returned to the hotel with as much caution as Eugénie used in leaving
it; she ran lightly upstairs, and with an aching heart entered her
apartment, contiguous, as we know, to that of Eugénie. She was fearful
of exciting any remark, and believed firmly in her daughter’s innocence
and fidelity to the paternal roof. She listened at Eugénie’s door, and
hearing no sound tried to enter, but the bolts were in place. Madame
Danglars then concluded that the young girl had been overcome with the
terrible excitement of the evening, and had gone to bed and to sleep.
She called the maid and questioned her.

Since then the maid had been below, and like everyone else she thought
the young ladies were in their own room; Madame Danglars, therefore,
went to bed without a shadow of suspicion, and began to muse over the
recent events. In proportion as her memory became clearer, the
occurrences of the evening were revealed in their true light; what she
had taken for confusion was a tumult; what she had regarded as something
distressing, was in reality a disgrace. And then the baroness remembered
that she had felt no pity for poor Mercédès, who had been afflicted with
as severe a blow through her husband and son.

The baroness then thought of M. de Villefort. It was M. de Villefort who
had remorselessly brought misfortune into her family, as though they had
been strangers. But, no; on reflection, the procureur was not a
merciless man; and it was not the magistrate, slave to his duties, but
the friend, the loyal friend, who roughly but firmly cut into the very
core of the corruption; it was not the executioner, but the surgeon, who
wished to withdraw the honor of Danglars from ignominious association
with the disgraced young man they had presented to the world as their
son-in-law. And since Villefort, the friend of Danglars, had acted in
this way, no one could suppose that he had been previously acquainted
with, or had lent himself to, any of Andrea’s intrigues. Villefort’s
conduct, therefore, upon reflection, appeared to the baroness as if
shaped for their mutual advantage. But the inflexibility of the
procureur should stop there; she would see him the next day, and if she
could not make him fail in his duties as a magistrate, she would, at
least, obtain all the indulgence he could allow. She would invoke the
past, recall old recollections; she would supplicate him by the
remembrance of guilty, yet happy days. M. de Villefort would stifle the
affair; he had only to turn his eyes on one side, and allow Andrea to
fly, and follow up the crime under that shadow of guilt called contempt
of court. And after this reasoning she slept easily.

Madame Danglars involuntarily shuddered at the desolate aspect of the
mansion; descending from the cab, she approached the door with trembling
knees, and rang the bell. Three times did the bell ring with a dull,
heavy sound, seeming to participate, in the general sadness, before the
concierge appeared and peeped through the door, which he opened just
wide enough to allow his words to be heard. He saw a lady, a
fashionable, elegantly dressed lady, and yet the door remained almost
closed.

“The baroness Danglars; you have seen me twenty times.”

The concierge closed the door, leaving Madame Danglars in the street.
She had not long to wait; directly afterwards the door was opened wide
enough to admit her, and when she had passed through, it was again shut.
Without losing sight of her for an instant, the concierge took a whistle
from his pocket as soon as they entered the court, and blew it. The
valet de chambre appeared on the door-steps.

Preoccupied as Madame Danglars had been with the object of her visit,
the treatment she had received from these underlings appeared to her so
insulting, that she began by complaining of it. But Villefort, raising
his head, bowed down by grief, looked up at her with so sad a smile that
her complaints died upon her lips.

Madame Danglars had often heard of the terror to which the magistrate
alluded, but without the evidence of her own eyesight she could never
have believed that the sentiment had been carried so far.

Madame Danglars gazed on Villefort, stupefied to find him so almost
insultingly calm. “Am I come to a friend?” she asked in a tone full of
mournful dignity.

“I was not thinking of that,” replied Madame Danglars quickly.

Villefort drew his armchair nearer to Madame Danglars; then resting both
hands upon his desk he said in a voice more hollow than usual:

“But”’ said Madame Danglars, resolving to make a last effort, “this
young man, though a murderer, is an orphan, abandoned by everybody.”

Villefort seized the letter, and hastily broke the seal. Madame Danglars
trembled with fear; Villefort started with joy.

Madame Danglars rose from her seat, pale and cold.

As the procureur had told Madame Danglars, Valentine was not yet
recovered. Bowed down with fatigue, she was indeed confined to her bed;
and it was in her own room, and from the lips of Madame de Villefort,
that she heard all the strange events we have related; we mean the
flight of Eugénie and the arrest of Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather
Benedetto, together with the accusation of murder pronounced against
him. But Valentine was so weak that this recital scarcely produced the
same effect it would have done had she been in her usual state of
health. Indeed, her brain was only the seat of vague ideas, and confused
forms, mingled with strange fancies, alone presented themselves before
her eyes.

Chapter 104. Danglars’ Signature

“His banker? Danglars is his banker, is he not?” asked Château-Renaud of
Debray.

Beauchamp told the truth when he said that on his way to the funeral he
had met Monte Cristo, who was directing his steps towards the Rue de la
Chaussée d’Antin, to M. Danglars’. The banker saw the carriage of the
count enter the courtyard, and advanced to meet him with a sad, though
affable smile.

“Mademoiselle Danglars?”

“And so Mademoiselle Danglars——”

“With Madame Danglars?”

Danglars looked at him askance, as though to ascertain whether he spoke
seriously.

Danglars smiled at the good-natured pleasantry of the count. “That
reminds me,” he said, “that when you entered I was on the point of
signing five little bonds; I have already signed two: will you allow me
to do the same to the others?”

“No,” said Danglars, smiling, “they are bonds on the bank of France,
payable to bearer. Stay, count,” he added, “you, who may be called the
emperor, if I claim the title of king of finance, have you many pieces
of paper of this size, each worth a million?”

The count took into his hands the papers, which Danglars had so proudly
presented to him, and read:—

“Baron Danglars.’”

“This is how I transact business,” said Danglars.

“It is, indeed, said Danglars.

And Monte Cristo placed the bonds in his pocket with one hand, while
with the other he held out the receipt to Danglars. If a thunderbolt had
fallen at the banker’s feet, he could not have experienced greater
terror.

“Oh, well, then,” said Monte Cristo, “I am not particular about these
five notes, pay me in a different form; I wished, from curiosity, to
take these, that I might be able to say that without any advice or
preparation the house of Danglars had paid me five millions without a
minute’s delay; it would have been remarkable. But here are your bonds;
pay me differently;” and he held the bonds towards Danglars, who seized
them like a vulture extending its claws to withhold the food that is
being wrested from its grasp.

“Yes,” said Danglars, while the perspiration started from the roots of
his hair. “Yes, keep it—keep it.”

“No,” said Danglars, “no, decidedly no; keep my signatures. But you know
none are so formal as bankers in transacting business; I intended this
money for the charity fund, and I seemed to be robbing them if I did not
pay them with these precise bonds. How absurd—as if one crown were not
as good as another. Excuse me;” and he began to laugh loudly, but
nervously.

“But,” said Danglars, “there is still a sum of one hundred thousand
francs?”

“Count,” said Danglars, “are you speaking seriously?”

Danglars again became pale, and hastened to conduct the count out. Monte
Cristo exchanged a ceremonious bow with M. de Boville, who was standing
in the waiting-room, and who was introduced into Danglars’ room as soon
as the count had left.

The count’s serious face was illumined by a faint smile, as he noticed
the portfolio which the receiver-general held in his hand. At the door
he found his carriage, and was immediately driven to the bank. Meanwhile
Danglars, repressing all emotion, advanced to meet the receiver-general.
We need not say that a smile of condescension was stamped upon his lips.

“And yet they say orphans are to be pitied,” said Danglars, wishing to
prolong the jest. “Poor things!”

“The count has an unlimited credit upon me; a credit opened by Thomson &
French, of Rome; he came to demand five millions at once, which I paid
him with checks on the bank. My funds are deposited there, and you can
understand that if I draw out ten millions on the same day it will
appear rather strange to the governor. Two days will be a different
thing,” said Danglars, smiling.

“Here is his receipt. Believe your own eyes.” M. de Boville took the
paper Danglars presented him, and read:

“Received of Baron Danglars the sum of five million one hundred thousand
francs, to be repaid on demand by the house of Thomson & French of
Rome.”

“It is one of the best houses in Europe,” said Danglars, carelessly
throwing down the receipt on his desk.

“Certainly,” said Danglars, in the most natural tone in the world. “Are
you then pressed for this money?”

“Send at twelve,” said Danglars, smiling.

“Now I think of it, you can do better,” said Danglars.

“I thought, perhaps,” said Danglars with supreme impertinence, “that you
had a deficiency to make up?”

“Everybody pities you, sir; and, above all, Mademoiselle Danglars!”

“Poor Eugénie!” said Danglars; “do you know she is going to embrace a
religious life?”

“Oh, it is terrible!” and M. de Boville retired with this exclamation,
after expressing acute sympathy with the father. But he had scarcely
left before Danglars, with an energy of action those can alone
understand who have seen Robert Macaire represented by Frédérick,24
exclaimed:

“To Madame la Baronne Danglars.”

The day after Monte Cristo had called upon Danglars, the mysterious
lodger entered at ten o’clock in the morning instead of four in the
afternoon. Almost directly afterwards, without the usual interval of
time, a cab arrived, and the veiled lady ran hastily upstairs. The door
opened, but before it could be closed, the lady exclaimed:

“Lucien, a great event has happened!” said the lady, glancing
inquiringly at Lucien,—“M. Danglars left last night!”

“Left?—M. Danglars left? Where has he gone?”

“‘Baron Danglars.’”

“Well?” asked Madame Danglars, with an anxiety easy to be understood.

“Oh, it is simple enough, madame; it inspires me with the idea that M.
Danglars has left suspiciously.”

“I tell you he will never return. I know his character; he is inflexible
in any resolutions formed for his own interests. If he could have made
any use of me, he would have taken me with him; he leaves me in Paris,
as our separation will conduce to his benefit;—therefore he has gone,
and I am free forever,” added Madame Danglars, in the same supplicating
tone.

“Yes; I do wish to ask your advice,” said Madame Danglars with anxious
expectation.

“Certainly; as M. Danglars says, you are rich, and perfectly free. In my
opinion, a withdrawal from Paris is absolutely necessary after the
double catastrophe of Mademoiselle Danglars’ broken contract and M.
Danglars’ disappearance. The world will think you abandoned and poor,
for the wife of a bankrupt would never be forgiven, were she to keep up
an appearance of opulence. You have only to remain in Paris for about a
fortnight, telling the world you are abandoned, and relating the details
of this desertion to your best friends, who will soon spread the report.
Then you can quit your house, leaving your jewels and giving up your
jointure, and everyone’s mouth will be filled with praises of your
disinterestedness. They will know you are deserted, and think you also
poor, for I alone know your real financial position, and am quite ready
to give up my accounts as an honest partner.”

“But then you are rich,—very rich, indeed,” continued Debray, taking out
some papers from his pocket-book, which he spread upon the table. Madame
Danglars did not see them; she was engaged in stilling the beatings of
her heart, and restraining the tears which were ready to gush forth. At
length a sense of dignity prevailed, and if she did not entirely master
her agitation, she at least succeeded in preventing the fall of a single
tear.

“Now, madame,” continued Debray, first opening the closet, then the
chest;—“now, madame, here are 800 notes of 1,000 francs each,
resembling, as you see, a large book bound in iron; to this I add a
certificate in the funds of 25,000 francs; then, for the odd cash,
making I think about 110,000 francs, here is a check upon my banker,
who, not being M. Danglars, will pay you the amount, you may rest
assured.”

Madame Danglars mechanically took the check, the bond, and the heap of
bank-notes. This enormous fortune made no great appearance on the table.
Madame Danglars, with tearless eyes, but with her breast heaving with
concealed emotion, placed the bank-notes in her bag, put the certificate
and check into her pocket-book, and then, standing pale and mute,
awaited one kind word of consolation.

Madame Danglars had until then, perhaps, hoped for something; but when
she saw the careless bow of Debray, and the glance by which it was
accompanied, together with his significant silence, she raised her head,
and without passion or violence or even hesitation, ran downstairs,
disdaining to address a last farewell to one who could thus part from
her.

And he calmly waited until the twenty minutes had elapsed after Madame
Danglars’ departure before he left the house. During this time he
occupied himself in making figures, with his watch by his side.

Above the room in which Debray had been dividing two millions and a half
with Madame Danglars was another, inhabited by persons who have played
too prominent a part in the incidents we have related for their
appearance not to create some interest.

“Mother,” exclaimed Albert, just as Madame Danglars was descending the
stairs, “let us reckon our riches, if you please; I want capital to
build my plans upon.”

“Madame Danglars? Nonsense! Impossible!” said Château-Renaud; “only ten
days after the flight of her daughter, and three days from the
bankruptcy of her husband?”

Just then a piercing cry, ending in a sob, burst from the centre of the
crowd, who encircled the lady who had before fainted, and who now fell
into a violent fit of hysterics. She was carried out of the hall, the
thick veil which concealed her face dropped off, and Madame Danglars was
recognized. Notwithstanding his shattered nerves, the ringing sensation
in his ears, and the madness which turned his brain, Villefort rose as
he perceived her.

The recent events formed the theme of conversation throughout all Paris.
Emmanuel and his wife conversed with natural astonishment in their
little apartment in the Rue Meslay upon the three successive, sudden,
and most unexpected catastrophes of Morcerf, Danglars, and Villefort.
Maximilian, who was paying them a visit, listened to their conversation,
or rather was present at it, plunged in his accustomed state of apathy.

“What a dire misfortune!” said Emmanuel, thinking of Morcerf and
Danglars.

“Baron Danglars.”

A door opened, through which the attendant and the baron disappeared.
The man who had followed Danglars sat down on a bench. The clerk
continued to write for the next five minutes; the man preserved profound
silence, and remained perfectly motionless. Then the pen of the clerk
ceased to move over the paper; he raised his head, and appearing to be
perfectly sure of privacy:

Peppino nodded, and taking a rosary from his pocket began to mutter a
few prayers while the clerk disappeared through the same door by which
Danglars and the attendant had gone out. At the expiration of ten
minutes the clerk returned with a beaming countenance.

“Hush—here is our man!” The clerk seized his pen, and Peppino his beads;
one was writing and the other praying when the door opened. Danglars
looked radiant with joy; the banker accompanied him to the door. Peppino
followed Danglars.

According to the arrangements, the carriage was waiting at the door. The
guide held the door open. Guides are useful people, who will turn their
hands to anything. Danglars leaped into the carriage like a young man of
twenty. The cicerone reclosed the door, and sprang up by the side of the
coachman. Peppino mounted the seat behind.

“I did not come to Rome to see,” said Danglars aloud; then he added
softly, with an avaricious smile, “I came to touch!” and he rapped his
pocket-book, in which he had just placed a letter.

Ten minutes afterwards the baron entered his apartment, and Peppino
stationed himself on the bench outside the door of the hotel, after
having whispered something in the ear of one of the descendants of
Marius and the Gracchi whom we noticed at the beginning of the chapter,
who immediately ran down the road leading to the Capitol at his fullest
speed. Danglars was tired and sleepy; he therefore went to bed, placing
his pocketbook under his pillow. Peppino had a little spare time, so he
had a game of morra with the facchini, lost three crowns, and then to
console himself drank a bottle of Orvieto.

The next morning Danglars awoke late, though he went to bed so early; he
had not slept well for five or six nights, even if he had slept at all.
He breakfasted heartily, and caring little, as he said, for the beauties
of the Eternal City, ordered post-horses at noon. But Danglars had not
reckoned upon the formalities of the police and the idleness of the
posting-master. The horses only arrived at two o’clock, and the cicerone
did not bring the passport till three.

All these preparations had collected a number of idlers round the door
of Signor Pastrini’s; the descendants of Marius and the Gracchi were
also not wanting. The baron walked triumphantly through the crowd, who
for the sake of gain styled him “your excellency.” As Danglars had
hitherto contented himself with being called a baron, he felt rather
flattered at the title of excellency, and distributed a dozen silver
coins among the beggars, who were ready, for twelve more, to call him
“your highness.”

Danglars intended travelling to Venice, where he would receive one part
of his fortune, and then proceeding to Vienna, where he would find the
rest, he meant to take up his residence in the latter town, which he had
been told was a city of pleasure.

He had scarcely advanced three leagues out of Rome when daylight began
to disappear. Danglars had not intended starting so late, or he would
have remained; he put his head out and asked the postilion how long it
would be before they reached the next town. “Non capisco” (do not
understand), was the reply. Danglars bent his head, which he meant to
imply, “Very well.” The carriage again moved on.

“I will stop at the first posting-house,” said Danglars to himself.

Danglars thought for ten minutes about his wife in Paris; another ten
minutes about his daughter travelling with Mademoiselle d’Armilly; the
same period was given to his creditors, and the manner in which he
intended spending their money; and then, having no subject left for
contemplation, he shut his eyes, and fell asleep. Now and then a jolt
more violent than the rest caused him to open his eyes; then he felt
that he was still being carried with great rapidity over the same
country, thickly strewn with broken aqueducts, which looked like granite
giants petrified while running a race. But the night was cold, dull, and
rainy, and it was much more pleasant for a traveller to remain in the
warm carriage than to put his head out of the window to make inquiries
of a postilion whose only answer was “Non capisco.”

Danglars therefore continued to sleep, saying to himself that he would
be sure to awake at the posting-house. The carriage stopped. Danglars
fancied that they had reached the long-desired point; he opened his eyes
and looked through the window, expecting to find himself in the midst of
some town, or at least village; but he saw nothing except what seemed
like a ruin, where three or four men went and came like shadows.

Danglars waited a moment, expecting the postilion to come and demand
payment with the termination of his stage. He intended taking advantage
of the opportunity to make fresh inquiries of the new conductor; but the
horses were unharnessed, and others put in their places, without anyone
claiming money from the traveller. Danglars, astonished, opened the
door; but a strong hand pushed him back, and the carriage rolled on. The
baron was completely roused.

This was another little piece of Italian the baron had learned from
hearing his daughter sing Italian duets with Cavalcanti. But mio caro
did not reply. Danglars then opened the window.

Danglars thought dentro la testa meant, “Put in your head!” He was
making rapid progress in Italian. He obeyed, not without some
uneasiness, which, momentarily increasing, caused his mind, instead of
being as unoccupied as it was when he began his journey, to fill with
ideas which were very likely to keep a traveller awake, more especially
one in such a situation as Danglars. His eyes acquired that quality
which in the first moment of strong emotion enables them to see
distinctly, and which afterwards fails from being too much taxed. Before
we are alarmed, we see correctly; when we are alarmed, we see double;
and when we have been alarmed, we see nothing but trouble. Danglars
observed a man in a cloak galloping at the right hand of the carriage.

Danglars turned to the left; another man on horseback was galloping on
that side.

“Decidedly,” said Danglars, with the perspiration on his forehead, “I
must be under arrest.” And he threw himself back in the calash, not this
time to sleep, but to think.

The carriage continued to roll on with frightful speed. An hour of
terror elapsed, for every spot they passed showed that they were on the
road back. At length he saw a dark mass, against which it seemed as if
the carriage was about to dash; but the vehicle turned to one side,
leaving the barrier behind and Danglars saw that it was one of the
ramparts encircling Rome.

“Mon dieu!” cried Danglars, “we are not returning to Rome; then it is
not justice which is pursuing me! Gracious heavens; another idea
presents itself—what if they should be——”

Just then the carriage rolled on something harder than gravel road.
Danglars hazarded a look on both sides of the road, and perceived
monuments of a singular form, and his mind now recalled all the details
Morcerf had related, and comparing them with his own situation, he felt
sure that he must be on the Appian Way. On the left, in a sort of
valley, he perceived a circular excavation. It was Caracalla’s circus.
On a word from the man who rode at the side of the carriage, it stopped.
At the same time the door was opened. “Scendi!” exclaimed a commanding
voice.

Danglars instantly descended; although he did not yet speak Italian, he
understood it very well. More dead than alive, he looked around him.
Four men surrounded him, besides the postilion.

“Di quà,” said one of the men, descending a little path leading out of
the Appian Way. Danglars followed his guide without opposition, and had
no occasion to turn around to see whether the three others were
following him. Still it appeared as though they were stationed at equal
distances from one another, like sentinels. After walking for about ten
minutes, during which Danglars did not exchange a single word with his
guide, he found himself between a hillock and a clump of high weeds;
three men, standing silent, formed a triangle, of which he was the
centre. He wished to speak, but his tongue refused to move.

This time Danglars had double reason to understand, for if the word and
gesture had not explained the speaker’s meaning, it was clearly
expressed by the man walking behind him, who pushed him so rudely that
he struck against the guide. This guide was our friend Peppino, who
dashed into the thicket of high weeds, through a path which none but
lizards or polecats could have imagined to be an open road.

Peppino stopped before a rock overhung by thick hedges; the rock, half
open, afforded a passage to the young man, who disappeared like the evil
spirits in the fairy tales. The voice and gesture of the man who
followed Danglars ordered him to do the same. There was no longer any
doubt, the bankrupt was in the hands of Roman banditti. Danglars
acquitted himself like a man placed between two dangerous positions, and
who is rendered brave by fear. Notwithstanding his large stomach,
certainly not intended to penetrate the fissures of the Campagna, he
slid down like Peppino, and closing his eyes fell upon his feet. As he
touched the ground, he opened his eyes.

The path was wide, but dark. Peppino, who cared little for being
recognized now that he was in his own territories, struck a light and
lit a torch. Two other men descended after Danglars forming the
rearguard, and pushing Danglars whenever he happened to stop, they came
by a gentle declivity to the intersection of two corridors. The walls
were hollowed out in sepulchres, one above the other, and which seemed
in contrast with the white stones to open their large dark eyes, like
those which we see on the faces of the dead. A sentinel struck the rings
of his carbine against his left hand.

“Fine spoil, captain, fine spoil!” said Peppino in Italian, and taking
Danglars by the collar of his coat he dragged him to an opening
resembling a door, through which they entered the apartment which the
captain appeared to have made his dwelling-place.

At this rather impertinent order, Peppino raised his torch to the face
of Danglars, who hastily withdrew that he might not have his eyelashes
burnt. His agitated features presented the appearance of pale and
hideous terror.

“Oh,” murmured Danglars, “that bed is probably one of the coffins
hollowed in the wall, and the sleep I shall enjoy will be death from one
of the poniards I see glistening in the darkness.”

From their beds of dried leaves or wolf-skins at the back of the chamber
now arose the companions of the man who had been found by Albert de
Morcerf reading Cæsar’s Commentaries, and by Danglars studying the Life
of Alexander. The banker uttered a groan and followed his guide; he
neither supplicated nor exclaimed. He no longer possessed strength,
will, power, or feeling; he followed where they led him. At length he
found himself at the foot of a staircase, and he mechanically lifted his
foot five or six times. Then a low door was opened before him, and
bending his head to avoid striking his forehead he entered a small room
cut out of the rock. The cell was clean, though empty, and dry, though
situated at an immeasurable distance under the earth. A bed of dried
grass covered with goat-skins was placed in one corner. Danglars
brightened up on beholding it, fancying that it gave some promise of
safety.

“Ecco!” said the guide, and pushing Danglars into the cell, he closed
the door upon him.

A bolt grated and Danglars was a prisoner. If there had been no bolt, it
would have been impossible for him to pass through the midst of the
garrison who held the catacombs of St. Sebastian, encamped round a
master whom our readers must have recognized as the famous Luigi Vampa.

Danglars, too, had recognized the bandit, whose existence he would not
believe when Albert de Morcerf mentioned him in Paris; and not only did
he recognize him, but the cell in which Albert had been confined, and
which was probably kept for the accommodation of strangers. These
recollections were dwelt upon with some pleasure by Danglars, and
restored him to some degree of tranquillity. Since the bandits had not
despatched him at once, he felt that they would not kill him at all.
They had arrested him for the purpose of robbery, and as he had only a
few louis about him, he doubted not he would be ransomed.

We awake from every sleep except the one dreaded by Danglars. He awoke.
To a Parisian accustomed to silken curtains, walls hung with velvet
drapery, and the soft perfume of burning wood, the white smoke of which
diffuses itself in graceful curves around the room, the appearance of
the whitewashed cell which greeted his eyes on awakening seemed like the
continuation of some disagreeable dream. But in such a situation a
single moment suffices to change the strongest doubt into certainty.

Danglars’ watch, one of Breguet’s repeaters, which he had carefully
wound up on the previous night, struck half past five. Without this,
Danglars would have been quite ignorant of the time, for daylight did
not reach his cell. Should he demand an explanation from the bandits, or
should he wait patiently for them to propose it? The last alternative
seemed the most prudent, so he waited until twelve o’clock. During all
this time a sentinel, who had been relieved at eight o’clock, had been
watching his door.

Danglars suddenly felt a strong inclination to see the person who kept
watch over him. He had noticed that a few rays, not of daylight, but
from a lamp, penetrated through the ill-joined planks of the door; he
approached just as the brigand was refreshing himself with a mouthful of
brandy, which, owing to the leathern bottle containing it, sent forth an
odor which was extremely unpleasant to Danglars. “Faugh!” he exclaimed,
retreating to the farther corner of his cell.

At twelve this man was replaced by another functionary, and Danglars,
wishing to catch sight of his new guardian, approached the door again.

“Ah, ha,” cried Danglars, “this fellow is more like an ogre than
anything else; however, I am rather too old and tough to be very good
eating!”

We see that Danglars was collected enough to jest; at the same time, as
though to disprove the ogreish propensities, the man took some black
bread, cheese, and onions from his wallet, which he began devouring
voraciously.

“May I be hanged,” said Danglars, glancing at the bandit’s dinner
through the crevices of the door,—“may I be hanged if I can understand
how people can eat such filth!” and he withdrew to seat himself upon his
goat-skin, which reminded him of the smell of the brandy.

But the mysteries of nature are incomprehensible, and there are certain
invitations contained in even the coarsest food which appeal very
irresistibly to a fasting stomach. Danglars felt his own not to be very
well supplied just then, and gradually the man appeared less ugly, the
bread less black, and the cheese more fresh, while those dreadful vulgar
onions recalled to his mind certain sauces and side-dishes, which his
cook prepared in a very superior manner whenever he said, “Monsieur
Deniseau, let me have a nice little fricassee today.” He got up and
knocked on the door; the bandit raised his head. Danglars knew that he
was heard, so he redoubled his blows.

“Come, come,” said Danglars, tapping his fingers against the door, “I
think it is quite time to think of giving me something to eat!”

But whether he did not understand him, or whether he had received no
orders respecting the nourishment of Danglars, the giant, without
answering, went on with his dinner. Danglars’ feelings were hurt, and
not wishing to put himself under obligations to the brute, the banker
threw himself down again on his goat-skin and did not breathe another
word.

Four hours passed by and the giant was replaced by another bandit.
Danglars, who really began to experience sundry gnawings at the stomach,
arose softly, again applied his eye to the crack of the door, and
recognized the intelligent countenance of his guide. It was, indeed,
Peppino who was preparing to mount guard as comfortably as possible by
seating himself opposite to the door, and placing between his legs an
earthen pan, containing chick-peas stewed with bacon. Near the pan he
also placed a pretty little basket of Villetri grapes and a flask of
Orvieto. Peppino was decidedly an epicure. Danglars watched these
preparations and his mouth watered.

Danglars immediately recognized him as the man who had called out in
such a furious manner, “Put in your head!” But this was not the time for
recrimination, so he assumed his most agreeable manner and said with a
gracious smile:

“Happen to be hungry,—that’s pretty good, when I haven’t eaten for
twenty-four hours!” muttered Danglars. Then he added aloud, “Yes, sir, I
am hungry—very hungry.”

“Of course!” cried Danglars. “Although, in justice, the people who
arrest and imprison you, ought, at least, to feed you.”

“A bad reason,” replied Danglars, who reckoned on conciliating his
keeper; “but I am content. Let me have some dinner!”

And Peppino placed his pan on the ground, so that the steam rose
directly under the nostrils of Danglars. “Give your orders.”

“I could almost believe myself at the Café de Paris,” murmured Danglars.

“Here, your excellency,” said Peppino, taking the fowl from the young
bandit and placing it on the worm-eaten table, which with the stool and
the goat-skin bed formed the entire furniture of the cell. Danglars
asked for a knife and fork.

“Here, excellency,” said Peppino, offering him a little blunt knife and
a boxwood fork. Danglars took the knife in one hand and the fork in the
other, and was about to cut up the fowl.

“Ah, ha,” thought Danglars, “this is not so much like Paris, except that
I shall probably be skinned! Never mind, I’ll fix that all right. I have
always heard how cheap poultry is in Italy; I should think a fowl is
worth about twelve sous at Rome.—There,” he said, throwing a louis down.

Peppino picked up the louis, and Danglars again prepared to carve the
fowl.

“I said they would skin me,” thought Danglars; but resolving to resist
the extortion, he said, “Come, how much do I owe you for this fowl?”

Danglars opened his enormous eyes on hearing this gigantic joke.

“Is it not a joke?” said Danglars.

“Oh, as for that,” said Danglars, angry at this prolongation of the
jest,—“as for that you won’t get them at all. Go to the devil! You do
not know with whom you have to deal!”

Peppino made a sign, and the youth hastily removed the fowl. Danglars
threw himself upon his goat-skin, and Peppino, reclosing the door, again
began eating his peas and bacon. Though Danglars could not see Peppino,
the noise of his teeth allowed no doubt as to his occupation. He was
certainly eating, and noisily too, like an ill-bred man. “Brute!” said
Danglars. Peppino pretended not to hear him, and without even turning
his head continued to eat slowly. Danglars’ stomach felt so empty, that
it seemed as if it would be impossible ever to fill it again; still he
had patience for another half-hour, which appeared to him like a
century. He again arose and went to the door.

“Bread? Very well. Holloa, there, some bread!” he called. The youth
brought a small loaf. “How much?” asked Danglars.

“And what am I to pay with, brute?” said Danglars, enraged. “Do you
suppose I carry 100,000 francs in my pocket?”

Danglars shuddered. The bandage fell from his eyes, and he understood
the joke, which he did not think quite so stupid as he had done just
before.

“Oh, nothing easier; you have an account open with Messrs. Thomson &
French, Via dei Banchi, Rome; give me a draft for 4,998 louis on these
gentlemen, and our banker shall take it.” Danglars thought it as well to
comply with a good grace, so he took the pen, ink, and paper Peppino
offered him, wrote the draft, and signed it.

Danglars sighed while he carved the fowl; it appeared very thin for the
price it had cost. As for Peppino, he examined the paper attentively,
put it into his pocket, and continued eating his peas.

The next day Danglars was again hungry; certainly the air of that
dungeon was very provocative of appetite. The prisoner expected that he
would be at no expense that day, for like an economical man he had
concealed half of his fowl and a piece of the bread in the corner of his
cell. But he had no sooner eaten than he felt thirsty; he had forgotten
that. He struggled against his thirst till his tongue clave to the roof
of his mouth; then, no longer able to resist, he called out. The
sentinel opened the door; it was a new face. He thought it would be
better to transact business with his old acquaintance, so he sent for
Peppino.

“Here I am, your excellency,” said Peppino, with an eagerness which
Danglars thought favorable to him. “What do you want?”

“Then give me water,” cried Danglars, endeavoring to parry the blow.

“Come,” thought Danglars, “it is the same old story.” And while he
smiled as he attempted to regard the affair as a joke, he felt his
temples get moist with perspiration.

“Come, my friend,” said Danglars, seeing that he made no impression on
Peppino, “you will not refuse me a glass of wine?”

“Tell me,” cried Danglars, in a tone whose bitterness Harpagon30 alone
has been capable of revealing—“tell me that you wish to despoil me of
all; it will be sooner over than devouring me piecemeal.”

And the next moment Luigi Vampa appeared before Danglars.

“Merely the 5,000,000 you have about you.” Danglars felt a dreadful
spasm dart through his heart.

“Come,” said Danglars, “will you take a million?”

“But when I have no more money left to pay you?” asked the infuriated
Danglars.

“Suffer hunger?” said Danglars, becoming pale.

“Well, then, wretches,” cried Danglars, “I will defy your infamous
calculations—I would rather die at once! You may torture, torment, kill
me, but you shall not have my signature again!”

Danglars, raving, threw himself on the goat-skin. Who could these men
be? Who was the invisible chief? What could be his intentions towards
him? And why, when everyone else was allowed to be ransomed, might he
not also be? Oh, yes; certainly a speedy, violent death would be a fine
means of deceiving these remorseless enemies, who appeared to pursue him
with such incomprehensible vengeance. But to die? For the first time in
his life, Danglars contemplated death with a mixture of dread and
desire; the time had come when the implacable spectre, which exists in
the mind of every human creature, arrested his attention and called out
with every pulsation of his heart, “Thou shalt die!”

Danglars resembled a timid animal excited in the chase; first it flies,
then despairs, and at last, by the very force of desperation, sometimes
succeeds in eluding its pursuers. Danglars meditated an escape; but the
walls were solid rock, a man was sitting reading at the only outlet to
the cell, and behind that man shapes armed with guns continually passed.
His resolution not to sign lasted two days, after which he offered a
million for some food. They sent him a magnificent supper, and took his
million.

“Take my last gold,” muttered Danglars, holding out his pocket-book,
“and let me live here; I ask no more for liberty—I only ask to live!”

Danglars thought of the old man whom, in his hours of delirium, he had
seen groaning on his bed. He struck his forehead on the ground and
groaned. “Yes,” he said, “there have been some who have suffered more
than I have, but then they must have been martyrs at least.”

“Do you repent?” asked a deep, solemn voice, which caused Danglars’ hair
to stand on end. His feeble eyes endeavored to distinguish objects, and
behind the bandit he saw a man enveloped in a cloak, half lost in the
shadow of a stone column.

“Of what must I repent?” stammered Danglars.

“The Count of Monte Cristo!” said Danglars, more pale from terror than
he had been just before from hunger and misery.

Danglars uttered a cry, and fell prostrate.

Danglars remained prostrate while the count withdrew; when he raised his
head he saw disappearing down the passage nothing but a shadow, before
which the bandits bowed.

According to the count’s directions, Danglars was waited on by Vampa,
who brought him the best wine and fruits of Italy; then, having
conducted him to the road, and pointed to the post-chaise, left him
leaning against a tree. He remained there all night, not knowing where
he was. When daylight dawned he saw that he was near a stream; he was
thirsty, and dragged himself towards it. As he stooped down to drink, he
saw that his hair had become entirely white.

