“That is according to the sense you attach to the question, sir. Do you
mean is he a good comrade? No, for I think he never liked me since the
day when I was silly enough, after a little quarrel we had, to propose
to him to stop for ten minutes at the island of Monte Cristo to settle
the dispute—a proposition which I was wrong to suggest, and he quite
right to refuse. If you mean as responsible agent when you ask me the
question, I believe there is nothing to say against him, and that you
will be content with the way in which he has performed his duty.”

“This 25th day of April, 1498, be... Alexander VI., and fearing that
not... he may desire to become my heir, and re... and Bentivoglio, who
were poisoned,... my sole heir, that I have bu... and has visited with
me, that is, in... Island of Monte Cristo, all I poss... jewels,
diamonds, gems; that I alone... may amount to nearly two mil... will
find on raising the twentieth ro... creek to the east in a right line.
Two open... in these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a... which
treasure I bequeath and leave en... as my sole heir. “25th April, 1498.
“Cæs... “And now,” said the abbé, “read this other paper;” and he
presented to Dantès a second leaf with fragments of lines written on it,
which Edmond read as follows:

“This 25th day of April, 1498, be...ing invited to dine by his Holiness
Alexander VI., and fearing that not...content with making me pay for my
hat, he may desire to become my heir, and re...serves for me the fate of
Cardinals Caprara and Bentivoglio, who were poisoned,...I declare to my
nephew, Guido Spada, my sole heir, that I have bu...ried in a place he
knows and has visited with me, that is, in...the caves of the small
Island of Monte Cristo, all I poss...essed of ingots, gold, money,
jewels, diamonds, gems; that I alone...know of the existence of this
treasure, which may amount to nearly two mil...lions of Roman crowns,
and which he will find on raising the twentieth ro...ck from the small
creek to the east in a right line. Two open...ings have been made in
these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a...ngle in the second;
which treasure I bequeath and leave en...tire to him as my sole heir.
“25th April, 1498. “Cæs...ar † Spada.”

The abbé did not know the Island of Monte Cristo; but Dantès knew it,
and had often passed it, situated twenty-five miles from Pianosa,
between Corsica and the Island of Elba, and had once touched there. This
island was, always had been, and still is, completely deserted. It is a
rock of almost conical form, which looks as though it had been thrust up
by volcanic force from the depth to the surface of the ocean. Dantès
drew a plan of the island for Faria, and Faria gave Dantès advice as to
the means he should employ to recover the treasure. But Dantès was far
from being as enthusiastic and confident as the old man. It was past a
question now that Faria was not a lunatic, and the way in which he had
achieved the discovery, which had given rise to the suspicion of his
madness, increased Edmond’s admiration of him; but at the same time
Dantès could not believe that the deposit, supposing it had ever
existed, still existed; and though he considered the treasure as by no
means chimerical, he yet believed it was no longer there.

“You see,” said the young man, with an air of sorrowful resignation, to
Faria, “that God deems it right to take from me any claim to merit for
what you call my devotion to you. I have promised to remain forever with
you, and now I could not break my promise if I would. The treasure will
be no more mine than yours, and neither of us will quit this prison. But
my real treasure is not that, my dear friend, which awaits me beneath
the sombre rocks of Monte Cristo, it is your presence, our living
together five or six hours a day, in spite of our jailers; it is the
rays of intelligence you have elicited from my brain, the languages you
have implanted in my memory, and which have taken root there with all
their philological ramifications. These different sciences that you have
made so easy to me by the depth of the knowledge you possess of them,
and the clearness of the principles to which you have reduced them—this
is my treasure, my beloved friend, and with this you have made me rich
and happy. Believe me, and take comfort, this is better for me than tons
of gold and cases of diamonds, even were they not as problematical as
the clouds we see in the morning floating over the sea, which we take
for terra firma, and which evaporate and vanish as we draw near to them.
To have you as long as possible near me, to hear your eloquent
speech,—which embellishes my mind, strengthens my soul, and makes my
whole frame capable of great and terrible things, if I should ever be
free,—so fills my whole existence, that the despair to which I was just
on the point of yielding when I knew you, has no longer any hold over
me; and this—this is my fortune—not chimerical, but actual. I owe you my
real good, my present happiness; and all the sovereigns of the earth,
even Cæsar Borgia himself, could not deprive me of this.”

Thus, if not actually happy, yet the days these two unfortunates passed
together went quickly. Faria, who for so long a time had kept silence as
to the treasure, now perpetually talked of it. As he had prophesied
would be the case, he remained paralyzed in the right arm and the left
leg, and had given up all hope of ever enjoying it himself. But he was
continually thinking over some means of escape for his young companion,
and anticipating the pleasure he would enjoy. For fear the letter might
be some day lost or stolen, he compelled Dantès to learn it by heart;
and Dantès knew it from the first to the last word. Then he destroyed
the second portion, assured that if the first were seized, no one would
be able to discover its real meaning. Whole hours sometimes passed while
Faria was giving instructions to Dantès,—instructions which were to
serve him when he was at liberty. Then, once free, from the day and hour
and moment when he was so, he could have but one only thought, which
was, to gain Monte Cristo by some means, and remain there alone under
some pretext which would arouse no suspicions; and once there, to
endeavor to find the wonderful caverns, and search in the appointed
spot,—the appointed spot, be it remembered, being the farthest angle in
the second opening.

“Listen, now, to what I say in this my dying moment. The treasure of the
Spadas exists. God grants me the boon of vision unrestricted by time or
space. I see it in the depths of the inner cavern. My eyes pierce the
inmost recesses of the earth, and are dazzled at the sight of so much
riches. If you do escape, remember that the poor abbé, whom all the
world called mad, was not so. Hasten to Monte Cristo—avail yourself of
the fortune—for you have indeed suffered long enough.”

And raising himself by a final effort, in which he summoned all his
faculties, he said,—“Monte Cristo, forget not Monte Cristo!” And he fell
back on the bed.

The next morning going on deck, as he always did at an early hour, the
patron found Dantès leaning against the bulwarks gazing with intense
earnestness at a pile of granite rocks, which the rising sun tinged with
rosy light. It was the Island of Monte Cristo.

Two months and a half elapsed in these trips, and Edmond had become as
skilful a coaster as he had been a hardy seaman; he had formed an
acquaintance with all the smugglers on the coast, and learned all the
Masonic signs by which these half pirates recognize each other. He had
passed and re-passed his Island of Monte Cristo twenty times, but not
once had he found an opportunity of landing there.

He then formed a resolution. As soon as his engagement with the patron
of La Jeune Amélie ended, he would hire a small vessel on his own
account—for in his several voyages he had amassed a hundred piastres—and
under some pretext land at the Island of Monte Cristo. Then he would be
free to make his researches, not perhaps entirely at liberty, for he
would be doubtless watched by those who accompanied him. But in this
world we must risk something. Prison had made Edmond prudent, and he was
desirous of running no risk whatever. But in vain did he rack his
imagination; fertile as it was, he could not devise any plan for
reaching the island without companionship.

The patron of La Jeune Amélie proposed as a place of landing the Island
of Monte Cristo, which being completely deserted, and having neither
soldiers nor revenue officers, seemed to have been placed in the midst
of the ocean since the time of the heathen Olympus by Mercury, the god
of merchants and robbers, classes of mankind which we in modern times
have separated if not made distinct, but which antiquity appears to have
included in the same category.

At the mention of Monte Cristo Dantès started with joy; he rose to
conceal his emotion, and took a turn around the smoky tavern, where all
the languages of the known world were jumbled in a lingua franca.

When he again joined the two persons who had been discussing the matter,
it had been decided that they should touch at Monte Cristo and set out
on the following night. Edmond, being consulted, was of opinion that the
island afforded every possible security, and that great enterprises to
be well done should be done quickly.

Chapter 23. The Island of Monte Cristo

Now this solitude was peopled with his thoughts, the night lighted up by
his illusions, and the silence animated by his anticipations. When the
patron awoke, the vessel was hurrying on with every sail set, and every
sail full with the breeze. They were making nearly ten knots an hour.
The Island of Monte Cristo loomed large in the horizon. Edmond resigned
the lugger to the master’s care, and went and lay down in his hammock;
but, in spite of a sleepless night, he could not close his eyes for a
moment.

Two hours afterwards he came on deck, as the boat was about to double
the Island of Elba. They were just abreast of Mareciana, and beyond the
flat but verdant Island of La Pianosa. The peak of Monte Cristo reddened
by the burning sun, was seen against the azure sky. Dantès ordered the
helmsman to put down his helm, in order to leave La Pianosa to
starboard, as he knew that he should shorten his course by two or three
knots. About five o’clock in the evening the island was distinct, and
everything on it was plainly perceptible, owing to that clearness of the
atmosphere peculiar to the light which the rays of the sun cast at its
setting.

“What, are there no grottos at Monte Cristo?” he asked.

He would fain have gazed upon his gold, and yet he had not strength
enough; for an instant he leaned his head in his hands as if to prevent
his senses from leaving him, and then rushed madly about the rocks of
Monte Cristo, terrifying the wild goats and scaring the sea-fowls with
his wild cries and gestures; then he returned, and, still unable to
believe the evidence of his senses, rushed into the grotto, and found
himself before this mine of gold and jewels.

Descending into the grotto, he lifted the stone, filled his pockets with
gems, put the box together as well and securely as he could, sprinkled
fresh sand over the spot from which it had been taken, and then
carefully trod down the earth to give it everywhere a uniform
appearance; then, quitting the grotto, he replaced the stone, heaping on
it broken masses of rocks and rough fragments of crumbling granite,
filling the interstices with earth, into which he deftly inserted
rapidly growing plants, such as the wild myrtle and flowering thorn,
then carefully watering these new plantations, he scrupulously effaced
every trace of footsteps, leaving the approach to the cavern as savage-
looking and untrodden as he had found it. This done, he impatiently
awaited the return of his companions. To wait at Monte Cristo for the
purpose of watching like a dragon over the almost incalculable riches
that had thus fallen into his possession satisfied not the cravings of
his heart, which yearned to return to dwell among mankind, and to assume
the rank, power, and influence which are always accorded to wealth—that
first and greatest of all the forces within the grasp of man.

Edmond preserved the most admirable self-command, not suffering the
faintest indication of a smile to escape him at the enumeration of all
the benefits he would have reaped had he been able to quit the island;
but as La Jeune Amélie had merely come to Monte Cristo to fetch him
away, he embarked that same evening, and proceeded with the captain to
Leghorn.

The following morning Jacopo set sail for Marseilles, with directions
from Dantès to join him at the Island of Monte Cristo.

The spectators followed the little vessel with their eyes as long as it
remained visible; they then turned their conjectures upon her probable
destination. Some insisted she was making for Corsica, others the Island
of Elba; bets were offered to any amount that she was bound for Spain;
while Africa was positively reported by many persons as her intended
course; but no one thought of Monte Cristo.

Yet thither it was that Dantès guided his vessel, and at Monte Cristo he
arrived at the close of the second day; his boat had proved herself a
first-class sailor, and had come the distance from Genoa in thirty-five
hours. Dantès had carefully noted the general appearance of the shore,
and, instead of landing at the usual place, he dropped anchor in the
little creek. The island was utterly deserted, and bore no evidence of
having been visited since he went away; his treasure was just as he had
left it.

Upon the eighth day he discerned a small vessel under full sail
approaching Monte Cristo. As it drew near, he recognized it as the boat
he had given to Jacopo. He immediately signalled it. His signal was
returned, and in two hours afterwards the new-comer lay at anchor beside
the yacht.

“The Island of Monte Cristo.”

“Monte Cristo although uninhabited, yet serves occasionally as a refuge
for the smugglers and pirates who come from Corsica, Sardinia, and
Africa, and if it becomes known that we have been there, we shall have
to perform quarantine for six days on our return to Leghorn.”

“But who will say your excellency has been to Monte Cristo?”

“Then steer for Monte Cristo.”

“Yes, and your conversation is most interesting; and as I wish to enjoy
it as long as possible, steer for Monte Cristo.”

They were within fifteen miles of Monte Cristo when the sun began to set
behind Corsica, whose mountains appeared against the sky, showing their
rugged peaks in bold relief; this mass of rock, like the giant
Adamastor, rose dead ahead, a formidable barrier, and intercepting the
light that gilded its massive peaks so that the voyagers were in shadow.
Little by little the shadow rose higher and seemed to drive before it
the last rays of the expiring day; at last the reflection rested on the
summit of the mountain, where it paused an instant, like the fiery crest
of a volcano, then gloom gradually covered the summit as it had covered
the base, and the island now only appeared to be a gray mountain that
grew continually darker; half an hour after, the night was quite dark.

“Then you know the men who are now on Monte Cristo?”

“Just our number, so that if they prove troublesome, we shall be able to
hold them in check; so, for the last time, steer to Monte Cristo.”

They advanced about thirty paces, and then stopped at a small esplanade
surrounded with rocks, in which seats had been cut, not unlike sentry-
boxes. Around in the crevices of the rocks grew a few dwarf oaks and
thick bushes of myrtles. Franz lowered a torch, and saw by the mass of
cinders that had accumulated that he was not the first to discover this
retreat, which was, doubtless, one of the halting-places of the
wandering visitors of Monte Cristo.

“I should like to be there at the time you come, and I will endeavor to
repay you, as far as lies in my power, for your liberal hospitality
displayed to me at Monte Cristo.”

As to Franz a strange transformation had taken place in him. All the
bodily fatigue of the day, all the preoccupation of mind which the
events of the evening had brought on, disappeared as they do at the
first approach of sleep, when we are still sufficiently conscious to be
aware of the coming of slumber. His body seemed to acquire an airy
lightness, his perception brightened in a remarkable manner, his senses
seemed to redouble their power, the horizon continued to expand; but it
was not the gloomy horizon of vague alarms, and which he had seen before
he slept, but a blue, transparent, unbounded horizon, with all the blue
of the ocean, all the spangles of the sun, all the perfumes of the
summer breeze; then, in the midst of the songs of his sailors,—songs so
clear and sonorous, that they would have made a divine harmony had their
notes been taken down,—he saw the Island of Monte Cristo, no longer as a
threatening rock in the midst of the waves, but as an oasis in the
desert; then, as his boat drew nearer, the songs became louder, for an
enchanting and mysterious harmony rose to heaven, as if some Loreley had
decreed to attract a soul thither, or Amphion, the enchanter, intended
there to build a city.

It was perfectly clear that the Signor Sinbad, Franz’s host, had the
honor of being on excellent terms with the smugglers and bandits along
the whole coast of the Mediterranean, and so enjoyed exceptional
privileges. As to Franz, he had no longer any inducement to remain at
Monte Cristo. He had lost all hope of detecting the secret of the
grotto; he consequently despatched his breakfast, and, his boat being
ready, he hastened on board, and they were soon under way. At the moment
the boat began her course they lost sight of the yacht, as it
disappeared in the gulf of Porto-Vecchio. With it was effaced the last
trace of the preceding night; and then supper, Sinbad, hashish,
statues,—all became a dream for Franz.

The boat sailed on all day and all night, and next morning, when the sun
rose, they had lost sight of Monte Cristo.

Franz said no more. The name of Sinbad the Sailor, as may well be
supposed, awakened in him a world of recollections, as had the name of
the Count of Monte Cristo on the previous evening.

This itinerary possessed another great advantage,—that of leaving Franz
at full liberty to indulge his deep reverie upon the subject of Signor
Pastrini’s story, in which his mysterious host of Monte Cristo was so
strangely mixed up. Seated with folded arms in a corner of the carriage,
he continued to ponder over the singular history he had so lately
listened to, and to ask himself an interminable number of questions
touching its various circumstances without, however, arriving at a
satisfactory reply to any of them.

Franz let him proceed without interruption, and, in fact, did not hear
what was said; he longed to be alone, and free to ponder over all that
had occurred. One of the two men, whose mysterious meeting in the
Colosseum he had so unintentionally witnessed, was an entire stranger to
him, but not so the other; and though Franz had been unable to
distinguish his features, from his being either wrapped in his mantle or
obscured by the shadow, the tones of his voice had made too powerful an
impression on him the first time he had heard them for him ever again to
forget them, hear them when or where he might. It was more especially
when this man was speaking in a manner half jesting, half bitter, that
Franz’s ear recalled most vividly the deep sonorous, yet well-pitched
voice that had addressed him in the grotto of Monte Cristo, and which he
heard for the second time amid the darkness and ruined grandeur of the
Colosseum. And the more he thought, the more entire was his conviction,
that the person who wore the mantle was no other than his former host
and entertainer, “Sinbad the Sailor.”

In vain did Franz endeavor to forget the many perplexing thoughts which
assailed him; in vain did he court the refreshment of sleep. Slumber
refused to visit his eyelids and the night was passed in feverish
contemplation of the chain of circumstances tending to prove the
identity of the mysterious visitant to the Colosseum with the inhabitant
of the grotto of Monte Cristo; and the more he thought, the firmer grew
his opinion on the subject.

“Your excellencies are aware,” responded the landlord, swelling with
importance, “that the Count of Monte Cristo is living on the same floor
with yourselves!”

“When, then, the Count of Monte Cristo, hearing of the dilemma in which
you are placed, has sent to offer you seats in his carriage and two
places at his windows in the Palazzo Rospoli.” The friends looked at
each other with unutterable surprise.

“What sort of person is this Count of Monte Cristo?” asked Franz of his
host.

“Please to deliver these, from the Count of Monte Cristo to Vicomte
Albert de Morcerf and M. Franz d’Épinay. The Count of Monte Cristo,”
continued the servant, “begs these gentlemen’s permission to wait upon
them as their neighbor, and he will be honored by an intimation of what
time they will please to receive him.”

Franz passed the night in confused dreams respecting the two meetings he
had already had with his mysterious tormentor, and in waking
speculations as to what the morrow would produce. The next day must
clear up every doubt; and unless his near neighbor and would-be friend,
the Count of Monte Cristo, possessed the ring of Gyges, and by its power
was able to render himself invisible, it was very certain he could not
escape this time.

“Now, my excellent Signor Pastrini,” said Franz, addressing his
landlord, “since we are both ready, do you think we may proceed at once
to visit the Count of Monte Cristo?”

“Most assuredly,” replied he. “The Count of Monte Cristo is always an
early riser; and I can answer for his having been up these two hours.”

As Franz spoke, he heard the sound of a door turning on its hinges, and
almost immediately afterwards the tapestry was drawn aside, and the
owner of all these riches stood before the two young men. Albert
instantly rose to meet him, but Franz remained, in a manner, spellbound
on his chair; for in the person of him who had just entered he
recognized not only the mysterious visitant to the Colosseum, and the
occupant of the box at the Teatro Argentina, but also his extraordinary
host of Monte Cristo.

Gentlemen,” said the Count of Monte Cristo as he entered, “I pray you
excuse me for suffering my visit to be anticipated; but I feared to
disturb you by presenting myself earlier at your apartments; besides,
you sent me word that you would come to me, and I have held myself at
your disposal.”

During the meal, which was excellent, and admirably served, Franz looked
repeatedly at Albert, in order to observe the impressions which he
doubted not had been made on him by the words of their entertainer; but
whether with his usual carelessness he had paid but little attention to
him, whether the explanation of the Count of Monte Cristo with regard to
duelling had satisfied him, or whether the events which Franz knew of
had had their effect on him alone, he remarked that his companion did
not pay the least regard to them, but on the contrary ate like a man who
for the last four or five months had been condemned to partake of
Italian cookery—that is, the worst in the world.

“Well,” asked Franz, “what think you of the Count of Monte Cristo?”

As for the Count of Monte Cristo, he had never for an instant shown any
appearance of having been moved. Imagine the large and splendid Corso,
bordered from one end to the other with lofty palaces, with their
balconies hung with carpets, and their windows with flags. At these
balconies are three hundred thousand spectators—Romans, Italians,
strangers from all parts of the world, the united aristocracy of birth,
wealth, and genius. Lovely women, yielding to the influence of the
scene, bend over their balconies, or lean from their windows, and shower
down confetti, which are returned by bouquets; the air seems darkened
with the falling confetti and flying flowers. In the streets the lively
crowd is dressed in the most fantastic costumes—gigantic cabbages walk
gravely about, buffaloes’ heads bellow from men’s shoulders, dogs walk
on their hind legs; in the midst of all this a mask is lifted, and, as
in Callot’s Temptation of St. Anthony, a lovely face is exhibited, which
we would fain follow, but from which we are separated by troops of
fiends. This will give a faint idea of the Carnival at Rome.

Franz hastened to inquire after the count, and to express regret that he
had not returned in sufficient time; but Pastrini reassured him by
saying that the Count of Monte Cristo had ordered a second carriage for
himself, and that it had gone at four o’clock to fetch him from the
Rospoli Palace.

The two friends sat down to table; but they could not refrain from
remarking the difference between the Count of Monte Cristo’s table and
that of Signor Pastrini. Truth compelled Franz, in spite of the dislike
he seemed to have taken to the count, to confess that the advantage was
not on Pastrini’s side. During dessert, the servant inquired at what
time they wished for the carriage. Albert and Franz looked at each
other, fearing really to abuse the count’s kindness. The servant
understood them.

“His excellency the Count of Monte Cristo had,” he said, “given positive
orders that the carriage was to remain at their lordships’ orders all
day, and they could therefore dispose of it without fear of
indiscretion.”

“The Count of Monte Cristo.”

Albert was impatient to see how he looked in his new dress—a jacket and
breeches of blue velvet, silk stockings with clocks, shoes with buckles,
and a silk waistcoat. This picturesque attire set him off to great
advantage; and when he had bound the scarf around his waist, and when
his hat, placed coquettishly on one side, let fall on his shoulder a
stream of ribbons, Franz was forced to confess that costume has much to
do with the physical superiority we accord to certain nations. The Turks
used to be so picturesque with their long and flowing robes, but are
they not now hideous with their blue frocks buttoned up to the chin, and
their red caps, which make them look like a bottle of wine with a red
seal? Franz complimented Albert, who looked at himself in the glass with
an unequivocal smile of satisfaction. They were thus engaged when the
Count of Monte Cristo entered.

Doubtless Albert was about to discuss seriously his right to the
academic chair when they were informed that dinner was ready. Albert’s
love had not taken away his appetite. He hastened with Franz to seat
himself, free to recommence the discussion after dinner. After dinner,
the Count of Monte Cristo was announced. They had not seen him for two
days. Signor Pastrini informed them that business had called him to
Civita Vecchia. He had started the previous evening, and had only
returned an hour since. He was charming. Whether he kept a watch over
himself, or whether by accident he did not sound the acrimonious chords
that in other circumstances had been touched, he was tonight like
everybody else.

He remembered the Count of Monte Cristo. Franz was about to ring for
Signor Pastrini, when that worthy presented himself.

Franz and the count went downstairs, accompanied by Peppino. At the door
they found the carriage. Ali was on the box, in whom Franz recognized
the dumb slave of the grotto of Monte Cristo. Franz and the count got
into the carriage. Peppino placed himself beside Ali, and they set off
at a rapid pace. Ali had received his instructions, and went down the
Corso, crossed the Campo Vaccino, went up the Strada San Gregorio, and
reached the gates of St. Sebastian. Then the porter raised some
difficulties, but the Count of Monte Cristo produced a permit from the
governor of Rome, allowing him to leave or enter the city at any hour of
the day or night; the portcullis was therefore raised, the porter had a
louis for his trouble, and they went on their way.

In the meanwhile Franz was considering the singular shudder that had
passed over the Count of Monte Cristo at the moment when he had been, in
some sort, forced to give his hand to Albert.

Franz did not doubt that these plans were the same concerning which the
count had dropped a few words in the grotto of Monte Cristo, and while
the count was speaking the young man watched him closely, hoping to read
something of his purpose in his face, but his countenance was
inscrutable especially when, as in the present case, it was veiled in a
sphinx-like smile.

“But tell me now, count,” exclaimed Albert, delighted at the idea of
having to chaperon so distinguished a person as Monte Cristo; “tell me
truly whether you are in earnest, or if this project of visiting Paris
is merely one of the chimerical and uncertain air castles of which we
make so many in the course of our lives, but which, like a house built
on the sand, is liable to be blown over by the first puff of wind?”

Franz then related to his friend the history of his excursion to the
Island of Monte Cristo and of his finding a party of smugglers there,
and the two Corsican bandits with them. He dwelt with considerable force
and energy on the almost magical hospitality he had received from the
count, and the magnificence of his entertainment in the grotto of the
Thousand and One Nights.

“Well,” said he, when Franz had concluded, “what do you find to object
to in all you have related? The count is fond of travelling, and, being
rich, possesses a vessel of his own. Go but to Portsmouth or
Southampton, and you will find the harbors crowded with the yachts
belonging to such of the English as can afford the expense, and have the
same liking for this amusement. Now, by way of having a resting-place
during his excursions, avoiding the wretched cookery—which has been
trying its best to poison me during the last four months, while you have
manfully resisted its effects for as many years,—and obtaining a bed on
which it is possible to slumber, Monte Cristo has furnished for himself
a temporary abode where you first found him; but, to prevent the
possibility of the Tuscan government taking a fancy to his enchanted
palace, and thereby depriving him of the advantages naturally expected
from so large an outlay of capital, he has wisely enough purchased the
island, and taken its name. Just ask yourself, my good fellow, whether
there are not many persons of our acquaintance who assume the names of
lands and properties they never in their lives were masters of?”

“Well,” said Franz with a sigh, “do as you please my dear viscount, for
your arguments are beyond my powers of refutation. Still, in spite of
all, you must admit that this Count of Monte Cristo is a most singular
personage.”

But, ere he entered his travelling carriage, Albert, fearing that his
expected guest might forget the engagement he had entered into, placed
in the care of a waiter at the hotel a card to be delivered to the Count
of Monte Cristo, on which, beneath the name of Viscount Albert de
Morcerf, he had written in pencil:

In the house in the Rue du Helder, where Albert had invited the Count of
Monte Cristo, everything was being prepared on the morning of the 21st
of May to do honor to the occasion. Albert de Morcerf inhabited a
pavilion situated at the corner of a large court, and directly opposite
another building, in which were the servants’ apartments. Two windows
only of the pavilion faced the street; three other windows looked into
the court, and two at the back into the garden.

“No, his name is the Count of Monte Cristo.”

“There is no Count of Monte Cristo” said Debray.

“Does anyone know anything of a Count of Monte Cristo?”

“I think I can assist your researches,” said Maximilian. “Monte Cristo
is a little island I have often heard spoken of by the old sailors my
father employed—a grain of sand in the centre of the Mediterranean, an
atom in the infinite.”

“Which means that my Count of Monte Cristo is one of those fishermen. He
has even a name taken from the book, since he calls himself Sinbad the
Sailor, and has a cave filled with gold.”

“Yes,” said Albert, “but this has nothing to do with the existence of
the Count of Monte Cristo.”

“At the same time,” added Château-Renaud, “your Count of Monte Cristo is
a very fine fellow, always excepting his little arrangements with the
Italian banditti.”

“No Count of Monte Cristo” added Debray. “There is half-past ten
striking, Albert.”

But the sound of the clock had not died away when Germain announced,
“His excellency the Count of Monte Cristo.” The involuntary start
everyone gave proved how much Morcerf’s narrative had impressed them,
and Albert himself could not wholly refrain from manifesting sudden
emotion. He had not heard a carriage stop in the street, or steps in the
antechamber; the door had itself opened noiselessly. The count appeared,
dressed with the greatest simplicity, but the most fastidious dandy
could have found nothing to cavil at in his toilet. Every article of
dress—hat, coat, gloves, and boots—was from the first makers. He seemed
scarcely five-and-thirty. But what struck everybody was his extreme
resemblance to the portrait Debray had drawn. The count advanced,
smiling, into the centre of the room, and approached Albert, who
hastened towards him holding out his hand in a ceremonial manner.

“Punctuality,” said Monte Cristo, “is the politeness of kings, according
to one of your sovereigns, I think; but it is not the same with
travellers. However, I hope you will excuse the two or three seconds I
am behindhand; five hundred leagues are not to be accomplished without
some trouble, and especially in France, where, it seems, it is forbidden
to beat the postilions.”

At these words it was still possible to observe in Monte Cristo the
concentrated look, changing color, and slight trembling of the eyelid
that show emotion.

This exclamation, which corresponded to the count’s own thought rather
than to what Albert was saying, surprised everybody, and especially
Morrel, who looked at Monte Cristo with wonder. But, at the same time,
the intonation was so soft that, however strange the speech might seem,
it was impossible to be offended at it.

“In reality,” replied the latter, who, with his aristocratic glance and
his knowledge of the world, had penetrated at once all that was
penetrable in Monte Cristo, “Albert has not deceived us, for the count
is a most singular being. What say you, Morrel!”

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo; “but, unfortunately, a recipe excellent for a
man like myself would be very dangerous applied to an army, which might
not awake when it was needed.”

“Oh, yes,” returned Monte Cristo; “I make no secret of it. It is a
mixture of excellent opium, which I fetched myself from Canton in order
to have it pure, and the best hashish which grows in the East—that is,
between the Tigris and the Euphrates. These two ingredients are mixed in
equal proportions, and formed into pills. Ten minutes after one is
taken, the effect is produced. Ask Baron Franz d’Épinay; I think he
tasted them one day.”

“Oh, no, monsieur,” replied Monte Cristo; “I do not thus betray my
enjoyments to the vulgar. I am a tolerable chemist, and prepare my pills
myself.”

“I had three similar ones,” returned Monte Cristo. “I gave one to the
Sultan, who mounted it in his sabre; another to our holy father the
Pope, who had it set in his tiara, opposite to one nearly as large,
though not so fine, given by the Emperor Napoleon to his predecessor,
Pius VII. I kept the third for myself, and I had it hollowed out, which
reduced its value, but rendered it more commodious for the purpose I
intended.”

Everyone looked at Monte Cristo with astonishment; he spoke with so much
simplicity that it was evident he spoke the truth, or that he was mad.
However, the sight of the emerald made them naturally incline to the
former belief.

“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “you promised me never to mention that
circumstance.”

“That is but fair,” replied Monte Cristo.

“No, monsieur,” returned Monte Cristo “upon the simple condition that
they should respect myself and my friends. Perhaps what I am about to
say may seem strange to you, who are socialists, and vaunt humanity and
your duty to your neighbor, but I never seek to protect a society which
does not protect me, and which I will even say, generally occupies
itself about me only to injure me; and thus by giving them a low place
in my esteem, and preserving a neutrality towards them, it is society
and my neighbor who are indebted to me.”

“My dear count,” cried Morcerf, “you are at fault—you, one of the most
formidable logicians I know—and you must see it clearly proved that
instead of being an egotist, you are a philanthropist. Ah, you call
yourself Oriental, a Levantine, Maltese, Indian, Chinese; your family
name is Monte Cristo; Sinbad the Sailor is your baptismal appellation,
and yet the first day you set foot in Paris you instinctively display
the greatest virtue, or rather the chief defect, of us eccentric
Parisians,—that is, you assume the vices you have not, and conceal the
virtues you possess.”

“My dear vicomte,” returned Monte Cristo, “I do not see, in all I have
done, anything that merits, either from you or these gentlemen, the
pretended eulogies I have received. You were no stranger to me, for I
knew you from the time I gave up two rooms to you, invited you to
breakfast with me, lent you one of my carriages, witnessed the Carnival
in your company, and saw with you from a window in the Piazza del Popolo
the execution that affected you so much that you nearly fainted. I will
appeal to any of these gentlemen, could I leave my guest in the hands of
a hideous bandit, as you term him? Besides, you know, I had the idea
that you could introduce me into some of the Paris salons when I came to
France. You might some time ago have looked upon this resolution as a
vague project, but today you see it was a reality, and you must submit
to it under penalty of breaking your word.”

“I will keep it,” returned Morcerf; “but I fear that you will be much
disappointed, accustomed as you are to picturesque events and fantastic
horizons. Amongst us you will not meet with any of those episodes with
which your adventurous existence has so familiarized you; our Chimborazo
is Mortmartre, our Himalaya is Mount Valérien, our Great Desert is the
plain of Grenelle, where they are now boring an artesian well to water
the caravans. We have plenty of thieves, though not so many as is said;
but these thieves stand in far more dread of a policeman than a lord.
France is so prosaic, and Paris so civilized a city, that you will not
find in its eighty-five departments—I say eighty-five, because I do not
include Corsica—you will not find, then, in these eighty-five
departments a single hill on which there is not a telegraph, or a grotto
in which the commissary of police has not put up a gaslamp. There is but
one service I can render you, and for that I place myself entirely at
your orders, that is, to present, or make my friends present, you
everywhere; besides, you have no need of anyone to introduce you—with
your name, and your fortune, and your talent” (Monte Cristo bowed with a
somewhat ironical smile) “you can present yourself everywhere, and be
well received. I can be useful in one way only—if knowledge of Parisian
habits, of the means of rendering yourself comfortable, or of the
bazaars, can assist, you may depend upon me to find you a fitting
dwelling here. I do not dare offer to share my apartments with you, as I
shared yours at Rome—I, who do not profess egotism, but am yet egotist
par excellence; for, except myself, these rooms would not hold a shadow
more, unless that shadow were feminine.”

“Eugénie Danglars,” said Monte Cristo; “tell me, is not her father Baron
Danglars?”

“What matter,” said Monte Cristo “if he has rendered the State services
which merit this distinction?”

“Ah,” interrupted Morcerf, laughing, “Beauchamp, Beauchamp, keep that
for the Corsaire or the Charivari, but spare my future father-in-law
before me.” Then, turning to Monte Cristo, “You just now spoke his name
as if you knew the baron?”

“I do not know him,” returned Monte Cristo; “but I shall probably soon
make his acquaintance, for I have a credit opened with him by the house
of Richard & Blount, of London, Arstein & Eskeles of Vienna, and Thomson
& French at Rome.” As he pronounced the two last names, the count
glanced at Maximilian Morrel. If the stranger expected to produce an
effect on Morrel, he was not mistaken—Maximilian started as if he had
been electrified.

“I shall be at your orders,” said Monte Cristo bowing.

“But,” continued Morcerf, “à propos of Danglars,—we have strangely
wandered from the subject. We were speaking of a suitable habitation for
the Count of Monte Cristo. Come, gentlemen, let us all propose some
place. Where shall we lodge this new guest in our great capital?”

Monte Cristo smiled imperceptibly.

“One minute,” cried Albert, without giving Monte Cristo the time to
reply. “Take care, you are going to immure a traveller, Sinbad the
Sailor, a man who comes to see Paris; you are going to make a patriarch
of him.”

“Thanks, monsieur,” said Monte Cristo; “I shall content myself with
being presented to your sister and her husband, if you will do me the
honor to introduce me; but I cannot accept the offer of anyone of these
gentlemen, since my habitation is already prepared.”

“Was I so badly lodged at Rome?” said Monte Cristo smiling.

“It is not that which deterred me,” replied Monte Cristo; “but as I
determined to have a house to myself, I sent on my valet de chambre, and
he ought by this time to have bought the house and furnished it.”

“It is the first time he has ever been in Paris. He is black, and cannot
speak,” returned Monte Cristo.

“Undeceive yourself, monsieur,” replied Monte Cristo; “I am quite sure,
that, on the contrary, he will choose everything as I wish. He knows my
tastes, my caprices, my wants. He has been here a week, with the
instinct of a hound, hunting by himself. He will arrange everything for
me. He knew, that I should arrive today at ten o’clock; he was waiting
for me at nine at the Barrière de Fontainebleau. He gave me this paper;
it contains the number of my new abode; read it yourself,” and Monte
Cristo passed a paper to Albert.

“No,” said Monte Cristo; “I told you I did not wish to be behind my
time; I dressed myself in the carriage, and descended at the viscount’s
door.” The young men looked at each other; they did not know if it was a
comedy Monte Cristo was playing, but every word he uttered had such an
air of simplicity, that it was impossible to suppose what he said was
false—besides, why should he tell a falsehood?

“Thanks, monsieur,” returned Monte Cristo, “my steward has orders to
take a box at each theatre.”

“I have something better than that,” said Monte Cristo; “I have a slave.
You procure your mistresses from the opera, the Vaudeville, or the
Variétés; I purchased mine at Constantinople; it cost me more, but I
have nothing to fear.”

“Oh, no,” replied Monte Cristo; “I do not carry brutalism so far.
Everyone who surrounds me is free to quit me, and when they leave me
will no longer have any need of me or anyone else; it is for that
reason, perhaps, that they do not quit me.”

And Maximilian Morrel left the room with the Baron de Château-Renaud,
leaving Monte Cristo alone with Morcerf.

When Albert found himself alone with Monte Cristo, “My dear count,” said
he, “allow me to commence my services as cicerone by showing you a
specimen of a bachelor’s apartment. You, who are accustomed to the
palaces of Italy, can amuse yourself by calculating in how many square
feet a young man who is not the worst lodged in Paris can live. As we
pass from one room to another, I will open the windows to let you
breathe.”

Monte Cristo had already seen the breakfast-room and the salon on the
ground floor. Albert led him first to his atelier, which was, as we have
said, his favorite apartment. Monte Cristo quickly appreciated all that
Albert had collected here—old cabinets, Japanese porcelain, Oriental
stuffs, Venetian glass, arms from all parts of the world—everything was
familiar to him; and at the first glance he recognized their date, their
country, and their origin.

It was the portrait of a young woman of five or six-and-twenty, with a
dark complexion, and light and lustrous eyes, veiled beneath long
lashes. She wore the picturesque costume of the Catalan fisherwomen, a
red and black bodice, and golden pins in her hair. She was looking at
the sea, and her form was outlined on the blue ocean and sky. The light
was so faint in the room that Albert did not perceive the pallor that
spread itself over the count’s visage, or the nervous heaving of his
chest and shoulders. Silence prevailed for an instant, during which
Monte Cristo gazed intently on the picture.

Monte Cristo glanced rapidly at Albert, as if to seek a hidden meaning
in his words, but it was evident the young man uttered them in the
simplicity of his heart.

Monte Cristo bowed without making any answer; he accepted the offer
without enthusiasm and without regret, as one of those conventions of
society which every gentleman looks upon as a duty. Albert summoned his
servant, and ordered him to acquaint M. and Madame de Morcerf of the
arrival of the Count of Monte Cristo. Albert followed him with the
count. When they arrived at the antechamber, above the door was visible
a shield, which, by its rich ornaments and its harmony with the rest of
the furniture, indicated the importance the owner attached to this
blazon. Monte Cristo stopped and examined it attentively.

“Yes,” replied Monte Cristo “these blazons prove that. Almost all the
armed pilgrims that went to the Holy Land took for their arms either a
cross, in honor of their mission, or birds of passage, in sign of the
long voyage they were about to undertake, and which they hoped to
accomplish on the wings of faith. One of your ancestors had joined the
Crusades, and supposing it to be only that of St. Louis, that makes you
mount to the thirteenth century, which is tolerably ancient.”

“Well, then, your government would do well to choose from the past
something better than the things that I have noticed on your monuments,
and which have no heraldic meaning whatever. As for you, viscount,”
continued Monte Cristo to Morcerf, “you are more fortunate than the
government, for your arms are really beautiful, and speak to the
imagination. Yes, you are at once from Provence and Spain; that
explains, if the portrait you showed me be like, the dark hue I so much
admired on the visage of the noble Catalan.”

Monte Cristo was engaged in examining this portrait with no less care
than he had bestowed upon the other, when another door opened, and he
found himself opposite to the Count of Morcerf in person.

“Father,” said the young man, “I have the honor of presenting to you the
Count of Monte Cristo, the generous friend whom I had the good fortune
to meet in the critical situation of which I have told you.”

“You are most welcome, monsieur,” said the Count of Morcerf, saluting
Monte Cristo with a smile, “and monsieur has rendered our house, in
preserving its only heir, a service which insures him our eternal
gratitude.”

Monte Cristo, in taking the seat Morcerf offered him, placed himself in
such a manner as to remain concealed in the shadow of the large velvet
curtains, and read on the careworn and livid features of the count a
whole history of secret griefs written in each wrinkle time had planted
there.

“It is a great honor to me,” returned Monte Cristo, “to be thus, on the
first day of my arrival in Paris, brought in contact with a man whose
merit equals his reputation, and to whom fortune has for once been
equitable, but has she not still on the plains of Mitidja, or in the
mountains of Atlas, a marshal’s staff to offer you?”

“These are the ideas that render your nation superior to any other,”
returned Monte Cristo. “A gentleman of high birth, possessor of an ample
fortune, you have consented to gain your promotion as an obscure
soldier, step by step—this is uncommon; then become general, peer of
France, commander of the Legion of Honor, you consent to again commence
a second apprenticeship, without any other hope or any other desire than
that of one day becoming useful to your fellow-creatures; this, indeed,
is praiseworthy,—nay, more, it is sublime.”

Albert looked on and listened with astonishment; he was not used to see
Monte Cristo give vent to such bursts of enthusiasm.

“Ah, father,” said Albert with a smile, “it is evident you do not know
the Count of Monte Cristo; he despises all honors, and contents himself
with those written on his passport.”

“Precisely, monsieur,” replied Monte Cristo with one of those smiles
that a painter could never represent or a physiologist analyze.

Monte Cristo, turned round hastily, and saw Madame de Morcerf at the
entrance of the salon, at the door opposite to that by which her husband
had entered, pale and motionless; when Monte Cristo turned round, she
let fall her arm, which for some unknown reason had been resting on the
gilded door-post. She had been there some moments, and had heard the
last words of the visitor. The latter rose and bowed to the countess,
who inclined herself without speaking.

“Go, then, and monsieur and I will strive our best to forget your
absence,” replied the countess, with the same tone of deep feeling.
“Monsieur,” continued she, turning to Monte Cristo, “will you do us the
honor of passing the rest of the day with us?”

Monte Cristo inclined himself without answering, but the gesture might
pass for assent.

“A thousand thanks for your kindness, viscount,” returned the Count of
Monte Cristo “but I suppose that M. Bertuccio has suitably employed the
four hours and a half I have given him, and that I shall find a carriage
of some sort ready at the door.”

Albert was used to the count’s manner of proceeding; he knew that, like
Nero, he was in search of the impossible, and nothing astonished him,
but wishing to judge with his own eyes how far the count’s orders had
been executed, he accompanied him to the door of the house. Monte Cristo
was not deceived. As soon as he appeared in the Count of Morcerf’s
antechamber, a footman, the same who at Rome had brought the count’s
card to the two young men, and announced his visit, sprang into the
vestibule, and when he arrived at the door the illustrious traveller
found his carriage awaiting him. It was a coupé of Koller’s building,
and with horses and harness for which Drake had, to the knowledge of all
the lions of Paris, refused on the previous day seven hundred guineas.

“Ma foi, spread that idea,” replied the Count of Monte Cristo, putting
his foot on the velvet-lined steps of his splendid carriage, “and that
will be worth something to me among the ladies.”

As he spoke, he sprang into the vehicle, the door was closed, but not so
rapidly that Monte Cristo failed to perceive the almost imperceptible
movement which stirred the curtains of the apartment in which he had
left Madame de Morcerf.

“What is this name of Monte Cristo?” inquired the countess, when the
servant had taken away the last vase of flowers, “is it a family name,
or the name of the estate, or a simple title?”

“You have seen, my dear Albert—I ask the question as a mother—you have
seen M. de Monte Cristo in his house, you are quicksighted, have much
knowledge of the world, more tact than is usual at your age, do you
think the count is really what he appears to be?”

“I say that Monte Cristo is an island in the midst of the Mediterranean,
without inhabitants or garrison, the resort of smugglers of all nations,
and pirates of every flag. Who knows whether or not these industrious
worthies do not pay to their feudal lord some dues for his protection?”

“Never mind,” continued the young man, “smuggler or not, you must agree,
mother dear, as you have seen him, that the Count of Monte Cristo is a
remarkable man, who will have the greatest success in the salons of
Paris. Why, this very morning, in my rooms, he made his entrée amongst
us by striking every man of us with amazement, not even excepting
Château-Renaud.”

He went down to the stables, not without some slight annoyance, when he
remembered that the Count of Monte Cristo had laid his hands on a
“turnout” which sent his bays down to second place in the opinion of
connoisseurs.

The house Ali had chosen, and which was to serve as a town residence to
Monte Cristo, was situated on the right hand as you ascend the Champs-
Élysées. A thick clump of trees and shrubs rose in the centre, and
masked a portion of the front; around this shrubbery two alleys, like
two arms, extended right and left, and formed a carriage-drive from the
iron gates to a double portico, on every step of which stood a porcelain
vase, filled with flowers. This house, isolated from the rest, had,
besides the main entrance, another in the Rue de Ponthieu. Even before
the coachman had hailed the concierge, the massy gates rolled on their
hinges—they had seen the Count coming, and at Paris, as everywhere else,
he was served with the rapidity of lightning. The coachman entered and
traversed the half-circle without slackening his speed, and the gates
were closed ere the wheels had ceased to sound on the gravel. The
carriage stopped at the left side of the portico, two men presented
themselves at the carriage-window; the one was Ali, who, smiling with an
expression of the most sincere joy, seemed amply repaid by a mere look
from Monte Cristo. The other bowed respectfully, and offered his arm to
assist the count in descending.

Monte Cristo gave his hat, cane, and gloves to the same French footman
who had called his carriage at the Count of Morcerf’s, and then he
passed into the small salon, preceded by Bertuccio, who showed him the
way.

“You are the notary empowered to sell the country house that I wish to
purchase, monsieur?” asked Monte Cristo.

“Ah, true,” observed Monte Cristo; “I recollect now. I read the
advertisement in one of the papers, and was tempted by the false title,
‘a country house.’”

“Oh, no,” returned Monte Cristo negligently; “since I have this, I will
keep it.”

“To be sure,” returned Monte Cristo; “it is very convenient, then?”

“Peste! let us not lose such an opportunity,” returned Monte Cristo.
“The deed, if you please, Mr. Notary.”

“Very well;” and Monte Cristo made a sign with his hand to the notary,
which said, “I have no further need of you; you may go.”

“No, excellency, no,” returned the steward, with a sort of nervous
trembling, which Monte Cristo, a connoisseur in all emotions, rightly
attributed to great disquietude.

“Why, what has happened to you?—are you going to make me ring a second
time for the carriage?” asked Monte Cristo, in the same tone that Louis
XIV. pronounced the famous, “I have been almost obliged to wait.”
Bertuccio made but one bound to the antechamber, and cried in a hoarse
voice:

Monte Cristo wrote two or three notes, and, as he sealed the last, the
steward appeared.

“Well, take your hat and gloves,” returned Monte Cristo.

Monte Cristo noticed, as they descended the staircase, that Bertuccio
signed himself in the Corsican manner; that is, had formed the sign of
the cross in the air with his thumb, and as he seated himself in the
carriage, muttered a short prayer. Anyone but a man of exhaustless
thirst for knowledge would have had pity on seeing the steward’s
extraordinary repugnance for the count’s projected drive without the
walls; but the count was too curious to let Bertuccio off from this
little journey. In twenty minutes they were at Auteuil; the steward’s
emotion had continued to augment as they entered the village. Bertuccio,
crouched in the corner of the carriage, began to examine with a feverish
anxiety every house they passed.

“What was the name of your old master?” said Monte Cristo.

Monte Cristo glanced at Bertuccio, who became whiter than the wall
against which he leaned to prevent himself from falling.

“And is not this daughter dead?” demanded Monte Cristo; “I fancy I have
heard so.”

“Thanks, thanks,” said Monte Cristo, judging from the steward’s utter
prostration that he could not stretch the cord further without danger of
breaking it. “Give me a light.”

And Monte Cristo accompanied these words by the gift of two gold pieces,
which produced a torrent of thanks and blessings from the concierge.

“What does this mean?” demanded the irresistible voice of Monte Cristo.

“What, what!” cried Monte Cristo, stopping suddenly, “what words do you
utter? Devil of a man, Corsican that you are—always mysteries or
superstitions. Come, take the lantern, and let us visit the garden; you
are not afraid of ghosts with me, I hope?”

“No, no, monsieur,” said Monte Cristo. “What is the use of following the
alleys? Here is a beautiful lawn; let us go on straight forwards.”

Bertuccio wiped the perspiration from his brow, but obeyed; however, he
continued to take the left hand. Monte Cristo, on the contrary, took the
right hand; arrived near a clump of trees, he stopped. The steward could
not restrain himself.

“My dear Monsieur Bertuccio,” said Monte Cristo, laughing, “control
yourself; we are not at Sartène or at Corte. This is not a Corsican
maquis but an English garden; badly kept, I own, but still you must not
calumniate it for that.”

Bertuccio clasped his hands, and as, in all these evolutions, he did not
let fall the lantern, the light showed his pale and altered countenance.
Monte Cristo examined him with the same look that, at Rome, he had bent
upon the execution of Andrea, and then, in a tone that made a shudder
pass through the veins of the poor steward—

“This is strange,” returned Monte Cristo, seeming to yield to his
reflections, “that you should find yourself without any preparation in a
house where the event happened that causes you so much remorse.”

“That is different,” replied Monte Cristo; “but if you intend to tell an
untruth, reflect it were better not to speak at all.”

“What!” cried Monte Cristo, “it was M. de Villefort?”

“Bah,” replied Monte Cristo, “impossible!”

“Ah, really,” said Monte Cristo. “Have you proof of this?”

“Where you please,” returned Monte Cristo, “since I know nothing at all
of it.”

“Ah,” said Monte Cristo, “1815 is not yesterday.”

“In the smuggling line?” said Monte Cristo.

“And this king’s attorney was named Villefort?” asked Monte Cristo
carelessly.

“Then,” said Monte Cristo “you went to him?”

“Well, well,” said Monte Cristo, “such an innocent looking person as you
are to do those things, M. Bertuccio, and to a king’s attorney at that!
But did he know what was meant by the terrible word ‘vendetta’?”

Monte Cristo made a sign with his head to show that he could discern in
the darkness the door to which Bertuccio alluded.

“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “it seems to me this was nothing but murder and
robbery.”

“And what did you do with the child?” asked Monte Cristo. “It was an
embarrassing load for a man seeking to escape.”

“What letters were marked on the linen?” said Monte Cristo.

“This,” said Monte Cristo, “is less correct than your philosophy,—it is
only faith.”

“Sweet child,” murmured Monte Cristo.

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo “I perfectly recollect him; I think he was your
colleague.”

“And you say,” interrupted Monte Cristo “that this took place towards
the year——”

“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “the evening of the 3rd of June, 1829. Go on.”

“And then it was, I presume,” said Monte Cristo “that you came to me as
the bearer of a letter from the Abbé Busoni?”

“And in what light did you view the occurrence?” inquired Monte Cristo.

“Everything is possible,” said Monte Cristo, rising from the bench on
which he had been sitting; “even,” he added in an inaudible voice, “even
that the procureur be not dead. The Abbé Busoni did right to send you to
me,” he went on in his ordinary tone, “and you have done well in
relating to me the whole of your history, as it will prevent my forming
any erroneous opinions concerning you in future. As for that Benedetto,
who so grossly belied his name, have you never made any effort to trace
out whither he has gone, or what has become of him?”

Bertuccio hid his face in his hands as he uttered these words, while
Monte Cristo fixed on him a look of inscrutable meaning. After a brief
silence, rendered still more solemn by the time and place, the count
said, in a tone of melancholy wholly unlike his usual manner:

That same evening, upon reaching his abode in the Champs-Élysées, the
Count of Monte Cristo went over the whole building with the air of one
long acquainted with each nook or corner. Nor, although preceding the
party, did he once mistake one door for another, or commit the smallest
error when choosing any particular corridor or staircase to conduct him
to a place or suite of rooms he desired to visit. Ali was his principal
attendant during this nocturnal survey. Having given various orders to
Bertuccio relative to the improvements and alterations he desired to
make in the house, the Count, drawing out his watch, said to the
attentive Nubian:

“I understand,” said Monte Cristo, well acquainted with Ali’s pantomime;
“you mean to tell me that three female attendants await their new
mistress in her sleeping-chamber.”

“Madame will be tired tonight,” continued Monte Cristo, “and will, no
doubt, wish to rest. Desire the French attendants not to weary her with
questions, but merely to pay their respectful duty and retire. You will
also see that the Greek servants hold no communication with those of
this country.”

About two o’clock the following day a calash, drawn by a pair of
magnificent English horses, stopped at the door of Monte Cristo and a
person, dressed in a blue coat, with buttons of a similar color, a white
waistcoat, over which was displayed a massive gold chain, brown
trousers, and a quantity of black hair descending so low over his
eyebrows as to leave it doubtful whether it were not artificial so
little did its jetty glossiness assimilate with the deep wrinkles
stamped on his features—a person, in a word, who, although evidently
past fifty, desired to be taken for not more than forty, bent forwards
from the carriage door, on the panels of which were emblazoned the
armorial bearings of a baron, and directed his groom to inquire at the
porter’s lodge whether the Count of Monte Cristo resided there, and if
he were within.

“Pray, does not the Count of Monte Cristo live here?”

Apprised in time of the visit paid him, Monte Cristo had, from behind
the blinds of his pavilion, as minutely observed the baron, by means of
an excellent lorgnette, as Danglars himself had scrutinized the house,
garden, and servants.

“Then how comes it,” said Monte Cristo with a frown, “that, when I
desired you to purchase for me the finest pair of horses to be found in
Paris, there is another pair, fully as fine as mine, not in my stables?”

Monte Cristo shrugged his shoulders. “It seems, sir steward,” said he,
“that you have yet to learn that all things are to be sold to such as
care to pay the price.”

Monte Cristo regarded the person who durst presume to doubt his words
with the look of one equally surprised and displeased.

“I am perfectly aware of that fact,” answered Monte Cristo calmly. Then,
turning towards Ali, he said, “Let all the horses in my stables be led
before the windows of your young lady, that she may select those she
prefers for her carriage. Request her also to oblige me by saying
whether it is her pleasure to dine with me; if so, let dinner be served
in her apartments. Now, leave me, and desire my valet de chambre to come
hither.”

“You seem incredulous,” said Monte Cristo, who repeated to Ali in the
Arabic language what he had just been saying to Baptistin in French.

“My horses,” said Monte Cristo.

“Gentlemen, pardon me for leaving you so abruptly; but a most ridiculous
circumstance has occurred, which is this,—Thomson & French, the Roman
bankers, have sent to me a certain person calling himself the Count of
Monte Cristo, and have given him an unlimited credit with me. I confess
this is the drollest thing I have ever met with in the course of my
extensive foreign transactions, and you may readily suppose it has
greatly roused my curiosity. I took the trouble this morning to call on
the pretended count—if he were a real count he wouldn’t be so rich. But,
would you believe it, ‘He was not receiving.’ So the master of Monte
Cristo gives himself airs befitting a great millionaire or a capricious
beauty. I made inquiries, and found that the house in the Champs-Élysées
is his own property, and certainly it was very decently kept up. But,”
pursued Danglars with one of his sinister smiles, “an order for
unlimited credit calls for something like caution on the part of the
banker to whom that order is given. I am very anxious to see this man. I
suspect a hoax is intended, but the instigators of it little knew whom
they had to deal with. ‘They laugh best who laugh last!’”

“I have the honor, I presume, of addressing M. de Monte Cristo.”

Monte Cristo repeated all the titles he had read on the baron’s card.

“So much so,” replied Monte Cristo, “that while you call yourself baron
you are not willing to call anybody else count.”

“Why,” said Danglars, “in the letter—I believe I have it about me”—here
he felt in his breast-pocket—“yes, here it is. Well, this letter gives
the Count of Monte Cristo unlimited credit on our house.”

“Is, in fact, unlimited,” said Monte Cristo.

“Meaning to say,” rejoined Monte Cristo, “that however Thomson & French
may be inclined to commit acts of imprudence and folly, the Baron
Danglars is not disposed to follow their example.”

“It seems, then, reserved for me,” said Monte Cristo coldly, “to be the
first to do so.”

Once more Danglars bit his lips. It was the second time he had been
worsted, and this time on his own ground. His forced politeness sat
awkwardly upon him, and approached almost to impertinence. Monte Cristo
on the contrary, preserved a graceful suavity of demeanor, aided by a
certain degree of simplicity he could assume at pleasure, and thus
possessed the advantage.

“Why, truly,” replied Monte Cristo, determined not to lose an inch of
the ground he had gained, “my reason for desiring an ‘unlimited’ credit
was precisely because I did not know how much money I might need.”

“I beg your pardon,” interposed Monte Cristo.

And with these words Monte Cristo took from his pocket a small case
containing his visiting-cards, and drew forth two orders on the treasury
for 500,000 francs each, payable at sight to the bearer. A man like
Danglars was wholly inaccessible to any gentler method of correction.
The effect of the present revelation was stunning; he trembled and was
on the verge of apoplexy. The pupils of his eyes, as he gazed at Monte
Cristo dilated horribly.

“Come, come,” said Monte Cristo, “confess honestly that you have not
perfect confidence in Thomson & French. I understand, and foreseeing
that such might be the case, I took, in spite of my ignorance of
affairs, certain precautions. See, here are two similar letters to that
you have yourself received; one from the house of Arstein & Eskeles of
Vienna, to Baron Rothschild, the other drawn by Baring of London, upon
M. Lafitte. Now, sir, you have but to say the word, and I will spare you
all uneasiness by presenting my letter of credit to one or other of
these two firms.”

“Nay,” answered Monte Cristo, with the most gentlemanly air, “’tis not
for such trifling sums as these that your banking house is to be
incommoded. Then, you can let me have some money, can you not?”

“Why,” replied Monte Cristo, “since we mutually understand each
other—for such I presume is the case?” Danglars bowed assentingly. “You
are quite sure that not a lurking doubt or suspicion lingers in your
mind?”

“Then, if I should require more,” continued Monte Cristo in a careless
manner, “why, of course, I should draw upon you; but my present
intention is not to remain in France more than a year, and during that
period I scarcely think I shall exceed the sum I mentioned. However, we
shall see. Be kind enough, then, to send me 500,000 francs tomorrow. I
shall be at home till midday, or if not, I will leave a receipt with my
steward.”

“It has been in the family a very long while,” returned Monte Cristo, “a
sort of treasure expressly forbidden to be touched for a certain period
of years, during which the accumulated interest has doubled the capital.
The period appointed by the testator for the disposal of these riches
occurred only a short time ago, and they have only been employed by me
within the last few years. Your ignorance on the subject, therefore, is
easily accounted for. However, you will be better informed as to me and
my possessions ere long.”

Monte Cristo bowed, in sign that he accepted the proffered honor;
Danglars rang and was answered by a servant in a showy livery.

“No, indeed,” replied Monte Cristo with a smile, “I do not arrogate to
myself the right of so doing.”

“And who is with madame?—M. Debray?” inquired Danglars, with an air of
indulgence and good-nature that made Monte Cristo smile, acquainted as
he was with the secrets of the banker’s domestic life.

Danglars nodded his head; then, turning to Monte Cristo, said, “M.
Lucien Debray is an old friend of ours, and private secretary to the
Minister of the Interior. As for my wife, I must tell you, she lowered
herself by marrying me, for she belongs to one of the most ancient
families in France. Her maiden name was De Servières, and her first
husband was Colonel the Marquis of Nargonne.”

“By all means,” replied Monte Cristo; “I follow you.”

Lucien had found time, preparatory to the count’s arrival, to relate
many particulars respecting him to Madame Danglars. It will be
remembered that Monte Cristo had made a lively impression on the minds
of all the party assembled at the breakfast given by Albert de Morcerf;
and although Debray was not in the habit of yielding to such feelings,
he had never been able to shake off the powerful influence excited in
his mind by the impressive look and manner of the count, consequently
the description given by Lucien to the baroness bore the highly-colored
tinge of his own heated imagination. Already excited by the wonderful
stories related of the count by de Morcerf, it is no wonder that Madame
Danglars eagerly listened to, and fully credited, all the additional
circumstances detailed by Debray. This posing at the piano and over the
album was only a little ruse adopted by way of precaution. A most
gracious welcome and unusual smile were bestowed on M. Danglars; the
count, in return for his gentlemanly bow, received a formal though
graceful courtesy, while Lucien exchanged with the count a sort of
distant recognition, and with Danglars a free and easy nod.

“Baroness,” said Danglars, “give me leave to present to you the Count of
Monte Cristo, who has been most warmly recommended to me by my
correspondents at Rome. I need but mention one fact to make all the
ladies in Paris court his notice, and that is, that he has come to take
up his abode in Paris for a year, during which brief period he proposes
to spend six millions of money. That means balls, dinners, and lawn
parties without end, in all of which I trust the count will remember us,
as he may depend upon it we shall him, in our own humble
entertainments.”

The baroness shrugged her shoulders with an air of ineffable contempt,
while her husband, affecting not to observe this unconjugal gesture,
turned towards Monte Cristo and said,—“Upon my word, count, I am quite
sorry not to have met you sooner. You are setting up an establishment,
of course?”

“How very singular,” cried Monte Cristo with well-feigned astonishment.

“I cannot believe it,” murmured the banker. Madame Danglars whispered a
few words in the ear of Debray, who approached Monte Cristo, saying,
“The baroness wishes to know what you paid her husband for the horses.”

Debray conveyed the count’s reply to the baroness. Poor Danglars looked
so crest-fallen and discomfited that Monte Cristo assumed a pitying air
towards him.

Danglars made no reply; he was occupied in anticipations of the coming
scene between himself and the baroness, whose frowning brow, like that
of Olympic Jove, predicted a storm. Debray, who perceived the gathering
clouds, and felt no desire to witness the explosion of Madame Danglars’
rage, suddenly recollected an appointment, which compelled him to take
his leave; while Monte Cristo, unwilling by prolonging his stay to
destroy the advantages he hoped to obtain, made a farewell bow and
departed, leaving Danglars to endure the angry reproaches of his wife.

“Excellent,” murmured Monte Cristo to himself, as he came away. “All has
gone according to my wishes. The domestic peace of this family is
henceforth in my hands. Now, then, to play another master-stroke, by
which I shall gain the heart of both husband and wife—delightful!
Still,” added he, “amid all this, I have not yet been presented to
Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars, whose acquaintance I should have been
glad to make. But,” he went on with his peculiar smile, “I am here in
Paris, and have plenty of time before me—by and by will do for that.”

To Danglars Monte Cristo also wrote, requesting him to excuse the
whimsical gift of a capricious millionaire, and to beg the baroness to
pardon the Eastern fashion adopted in the return of the horses.

During the evening, Monte Cristo quitted Paris for Auteuil, accompanied
by Ali. The following day, about three o’clock, a single blow struck on
the gong summoned Ali to the presence of the count.

“I understand,” said Monte Cristo; “you wish to tell me you have hunted
the lion?”

“It is well,” said Monte Cristo. “Then listen to me. Ere long a carriage
will dash past here, drawn by the pair of dappled gray horses you saw me
with yesterday; now, at the risk of your own life, you must manage to
stop those horses before my door.”

Ali descended to the street, and marked a straight line on the pavement
immediately at the entrance of the house, and then pointed out the line
he had traced to the count, who was watching him. The count patted him
gently on the shoulder, his usual mode of praising Ali, who, pleased and
gratified with the commission assigned him, walked calmly towards a
projecting stone forming the angle of the street and house, and, seating
himself thereon, began to smoke his chibouque, while Monte Cristo re-
entered his dwelling, perfectly assured of the success of his plan.

All this was achieved in much less time than is occupied in the recital.
The brief space had, however, been sufficient for a man, followed by a
number of servants, to rush from the house before which the accident had
occurred, and, as the coachman opened the door of the carriage, to take
from it a lady who was convulsively grasping the cushions with one hand,
while with the other she pressed to her bosom the young boy, who had
lost consciousness. Monte Cristo carried them both to the salon, and
deposited them on a sofa.

With a calm smile and a gentle wave of the hand, Monte Cristo signed to
the distracted mother to lay aside her apprehensions; then, opening a
casket that stood near, he drew forth a phial of Bohemian glass
incrusted with gold, containing a liquid of the color of blood, of which
he let fall a single drop on the child’s lips. Scarcely had it reached
them, ere the boy, though still pale as marble, opened his eyes, and
eagerly gazed around him. At this, the delight of the mother was almost
frantic.

“You are, then, doubtless, the Count of Monte Cristo, of whom Hermine
has talked to me so much?”

“I beseech you, madame,” replied Monte Cristo “not to spoil Ali, either
by too great praise or rewards. I cannot allow him to acquire the habit
of expecting to be recompensed for every trifling service he may render.
Ali is my slave, and in saving your life he was but discharging his duty
to me.”

During the evident preoccupation of Madame de Villefort, Monte Cristo
scrutinized the features and appearance of the boy she kept folded in
her arms, lavishing on him the most tender endearments. The child was
small for his age, and unnaturally pale. A mass of straight black hair,
defying all attempts to train or curl it, fell over his projecting
forehead, and hung down to his shoulders, giving increased vivacity to
eyes already sparkling with a youthful love of mischief and fondness for
every forbidden enjoyment. His mouth was large, and the lips, which had
not yet regained their color, were particularly thin; in fact, the deep
and crafty look, giving a predominant expression to the child’s face,
belonged rather to a boy of twelve or fourteen than to one so young. His
first movement was to free himself by a violent push from the encircling
arms of his mother, and to rush forward to the casket from whence the
count had taken the phial of elixir; then, without asking permission of
anyone, he proceeded, in all the wilfulness of a spoiled child
unaccustomed to restrain either whims or caprices, to pull the corks out
of all the bottles.

Ali turned his intelligent countenance towards the boy, on whom he gazed
without any apparent emotion; but the spasmodic working of the nostrils
showed to the practiced eye of Monte Cristo that the Arab had been
wounded to the heart.

“No, I do not,” replied Monte Cristo; “it is a small place I have
purchased quite lately. My place of abode is No. 30, Avenue des Champs-
Élysées; but I see you have quite recovered from your fright, and are,
no doubt, desirous of returning home. Anticipating your wishes, I have
desired the same horses you came with to be put to one of my carriages,
and Ali, he whom you think so very ugly,” continued he, addressing the
boy with a smiling air, “will have the honor of driving you home, while
your coachman remains here to attend to the necessary repairs of your
calash. As soon as that important business is concluded, I will have a
pair of my own horses harnessed to convey it direct to Madame Danglars.”

“You will see,” replied Monte Cristo, “that they will be as different as
possible in the hands of Ali. With him they will be gentle and docile as
lambs.”

“Dear Hermine,—I have just had a wonderful escape from the most imminent
danger, and I owe my safety to the very Count of Monte Cristo we were
talking about yesterday, but whom I little expected to see today. I
remember how unmercifully I laughed at what I considered your eulogistic
and exaggerated praises of him; but I have now ample cause to admit that
your enthusiastic description of this wonderful man fell far short of
his merits. Your horses got as far as Ranelagh, when they darted forward
like mad things, and galloped away at so fearful a rate, that there
seemed no other prospect for myself and my poor Edward but that of being
dashed to pieces against the first object that impeded their progress,
when a strange-looking man,—an Arab, a negro, or a Nubian, at least a
black of some nation or other—at a signal from the count, whose domestic
he is, suddenly seized and stopped the infuriated animals, even at the
risk of being trampled to death himself; and certainly he must have had
a most wonderful escape. The count then hastened to us, and took us into
his house, where he speedily recalled my poor Edward to life. He sent us
home in his own carriage. Yours will be returned to you tomorrow. You
will find your horses in bad condition, from the results of this
accident; they seem thoroughly stupefied, as if sulky and vexed at
having been conquered by man. The count, however, has commissioned me to
assure you that two or three days’ rest, with plenty of barley for their
sole food during that time, will bring them back to as fine, that is as
terrifying, a condition as they were in yesterday.

Adieu! I cannot return you many thanks for the drive of yesterday; but,
after all, I ought not to blame you for the misconduct of your horses,
more especially as it procured me the pleasure of an introduction to the
Count of Monte Cristo,—and certainly that illustrious personage, apart
from the millions he is said to be so very anxious to dispose of, seemed
to me one of those curiously interesting problems I, for one, delight in
solving at any risk, even if it were to necessitate another drive to the
Bois behind your horses.

If the Count of Monte Cristo had been for a long time familiar with the
ways of Parisian society, he would have appreciated better the
significance of the step which M. de Villefort had taken. Standing well
at court, whether the king regnant was of the older or younger branch,
whether the government was doctrinaire liberal, or conservative; looked
upon by all as a man of talent, since those who have never experienced a
political check are generally so regarded; hated by many, but warmly
supported by others, without being really liked by anybody, M. de
Villefort held a high position in the magistracy, and maintained his
eminence like a Harlay or a Molé. His drawing-room, under the
regenerating influence of a young wife and a daughter by his first
marriage, scarcely eighteen, was still one of the well-regulated Paris
salons where the worship of traditional customs and the observance of
rigid etiquette were carefully maintained. A freezing politeness, a
strict fidelity to government principles, a profound contempt for
theories and theorists, a deep-seated hatred of ideality,—these were the
elements of private and public life displayed by M. de Villefort.

Such was the man whose carriage had just now stopped before the Count of
Monte Cristo’s door. The valet de chambre announced M. de Villefort at
the moment when the count, leaning over a large table, was tracing on a
map the route from St. Petersburg to China.

Although master of himself, Monte Cristo, scrutinized with irrepressible
curiosity the magistrate whose salute he returned, and who, distrustful
by habit, and especially incredulous as to social prodigies, was much
more despised to look upon “the noble stranger,” as Monte Cristo was
already called, as an adventurer in search of new fields, or an escaped
criminal, rather than as a prince of the Holy See, or a sultan of the
Thousand and One Nights.

He glanced around, in order to seize on something on which the
conversation might turn, and seemed to fall easily on a topic. He saw
the map which Monte Cristo had been examining when he entered, and said:

Monte Cristo pointed to a chair, which the procureur was obliged to take
the trouble to move forwards himself, while the count merely fell back
into his own, on which he had been kneeling when M. Villefort entered.
Thus the count was halfway turned towards his visitor, having his back
towards the window, his elbow resting on the geographical chart which
furnished the theme of conversation for the moment,—a conversation which
assumed, as in the case of the interviews with Danglars and Morcerf, a
turn analogous to the persons, if not to the situation.

“Why, in truth, sir,” was Monte Cristo’s reply, “man is but an ugly
caterpillar for him who studies him through a solar microscope; but you
said, I think, that I had nothing else to do. Now, really, let me ask,
sir, have you?—do you believe you have anything to do? or to speak in
plain terms, do you really think that what you do deserves being called
anything?”

“It may, perhaps, come to this in time,” observed Monte Cristo; “you
know that human inventions march from the complex to the simple, and
simplicity is always perfection.”

Monte Cristo smiled.

“And why not?” said Monte Cristo coldly.

“I know it sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “but when I visit a country I
begin to study, by all the means which are available, the men from whom
I may have anything to hope or to fear, till I know them as well as,
perhaps better than, they know themselves. It follows from this, that
the king’s attorney, be he who he may, with whom I should have to deal,
would assuredly be more embarrassed than I should.”

“Faults or crimes,” responded Monte Cristo with a negligent air.

“Above us all, sir,” was Monte Cristo’s response, in a tone and with an
emphasis so deep that Villefort involuntarily shuddered. “I have my
pride for men—serpents always ready to threaten everyone who would pass
without crushing them under foot. But I lay aside that pride before God,
who has taken me from nothing to make me what I am.”

“I too, as happens to every man once in his life, have been taken by
Satan into the highest mountain in the earth, and when there he showed
me all the kingdoms of the world, and as he said before, so said he to
me, ‘Child of earth, what wouldst thou have to make thee adore me?’ I
reflected long, for a gnawing ambition had long preyed upon me, and then
I replied, ‘Listen,—I have always heard of Providence, and yet I have
never seen him, or anything that resembles him, or which can make me
believe that he exists. I wish to be Providence myself, for I feel that
the most beautiful, noblest, most sublime thing in the world, is to
recompense and punish.’ Satan bowed his head, and groaned. ‘You
mistake,’ he said, ‘Providence does exist, only you have never seen him,
because the child of God is as invisible as the parent. You have seen
nothing that resembles him, because he works by secret springs, and
moves by hidden ways. All I can do for you is to make you one of the
agents of that Providence.’ The bargain was concluded. I may sacrifice
my soul, but what matters it?” added Monte Cristo. “If the thing were to
do again, I would again do it.”

Villefort looked at Monte Cristo with extreme amazement.

“Why?” asked Monte Cristo.

“Alas, sir,” said Monte Cristo “this spectacle is neither strange to my
eye nor my thought. I am something of a physician, and have, like my
fellows, sought more than once for the soul in living and in dead
matter; yet, like Providence, it has remained invisible to my eyes,
although present to my heart. A hundred writers since Socrates, Seneca,
St. Augustine, and Gall, have made, in verse and prose, the comparison
you have made, and yet I can well understand that a father’s sufferings
may effect great changes in the mind of a son. I will call on you, sir,
since you bid me contemplate, for the advantage of my pride, this
terrible spectacle, which must have been so great a source of sorrow to
your family.”

Monte Cristo with a smile on his lips, uttered in the depths of his soul
a groan which would have made Villefort fly had he but heard it.

The count bowed, and contented himself with seeing Villefort to the door
of his cabinet, the procureur being escorted to his carriage by two
footmen, who, on a signal from their master, followed him with every
mark of attention. When he had gone, Monte Cristo breathed a profound
sigh, and said:

It will be recollected that the new, or rather old, acquaintances of the
Count of Monte Cristo, residing in the Rue Meslay, were no other than
Maximilian, Julie, and Emmanuel.

It was noon, and Monte Cristo had set apart one hour to be passed in the
apartments of Haydée, as though his oppressed spirit could not all at
once admit the feeling of pure and unmixed joy, but required a gradual
succession of calm and gentle emotions to prepare his mind to receive
full and perfect happiness, in the same manner as ordinary natures
demand to be inured by degrees to the reception of strong or violent
sensations.

Haydée had three French maids, and one who was a Greek. The first three
remained constantly in a small waiting-room, ready to obey the summons
of a small golden bell, or to receive the orders of the Romaic slave,
who knew just enough French to be able to transmit her mistress’s wishes
to the three other waiting-women; the latter had received most
peremptory instructions from Monte Cristo to treat Haydée with all the
deference they would observe to a queen.

Monte Cristo summoned the Greek attendant, and bade her inquire whether
it would be agreeable to her mistress to receive his visit. Haydée’s
only reply was to direct her servant by a sign to withdraw the
tapestried curtain that hung before the door of her boudoir, the
framework of the opening thus made serving as a sort of border to the
graceful tableau presented by the young girl’s picturesque attitude and
appearance.

As Monte Cristo approached, she leaned upon the elbow of the arm that
held the narghile, and extending to him her other hand, said, with a
smile of captivating sweetness, in the sonorous language spoken by the
women of Athens and Sparta:

Monte Cristo returned her smile.

“My poor child,” replied Monte Cristo, “that is merely because your
father and myself are the only men who have ever talked to you.”

“And where am I?” inquired Monte Cristo laughingly.

“You?” cried she, with tones of thrilling tenderness, “you are
everywhere!” Monte Cristo took the delicate hand of the young girl in
his, and was about to raise it to his lips, when the simple child of
nature hastily withdrew it, and presented her cheek.

The young girl raised her tearful eyes towards Monte Cristo as she said
with touching earnestness, “Whether we return to the East, you mean to
say, my lord, do you not?”

“My child,” returned Monte Cristo “you know full well that whenever we
part, it will be no fault or wish of mine; the tree forsakes not the
flower—the flower falls from the tree.”

Monte Cristo, thus attuned to the interview he proposed to hold with
Morrel and his family, departed, murmuring as he went these lines of
Pindar, “Youth is a flower of which love is the fruit; happy is he who,
after having watched its silent growth, is permitted to gather and call
it his own.” The carriage was prepared according to orders, and stepping
lightly into it, the count drove off at his usual rapid pace.

Cocles opened the gate, and Baptistin, springing from the box, inquired
whether Monsieur and Madame Herbault and Monsieur Maximilian Morrel
would see his excellency the Count of Monte Cristo.

“The Count of Monte Cristo?” cried Morrel, throwing away his cigar and
hastening to the carriage; “I should think we would see him. Ah, a
thousand thanks, count, for not having forgotten your promise.”

Then, turning to Monte Cristo,—“I hope you will permit me to leave you
for a few minutes,” continued she; and without awaiting any reply,
disappeared behind a clump of trees, and escaped to the house by a
lateral alley.

“I am sorry to see,” observed Monte Cristo to Morrel, “that I cause no
small disturbance in your house.”

“Five-and-twenty thousand francs is not a large sum, however,” replied
Monte Cristo, with a tone so sweet and gentle, that it went to
Maximilian’s heart like the voice of a father; “but they will not be
content with that. Your brother-in-law is a barrister? a doctor?”

Maximilian had scarcely finished his story, during which the count’s
heart had swelled within him, when Emmanuel entered wearing a hat and
coat. He saluted the count with the air of a man who is aware of the
rank of his guest; then, after having led Monte Cristo around the little
garden, he returned to the house.

“And God has poured balm into your wounds, as he does into those of all
who are in affliction?” said Monte Cristo inquiringly.

Monte Cristo rose, and without making any answer (for the tremulousness
of his voice would have betrayed his emotion) walked up and down the
apartment with a slow step.

“No, no,” returned Monte Cristo, pale as death, pressing one hand on his
heart to still its throbbings, while with the other he pointed to a
crystal cover, beneath which a silken purse lay on a black velvet
cushion. “I was wondering what could be the significance of this purse,
with the paper at one end and the large diamond at the other.”

“This I do not comprehend; and yet I may not ask for an explanation,
madame,” replied Monte Cristo bowing. “Pardon me, I had no intention of
committing an indiscretion.”

“Ah, really,” said Monte Cristo in a half-stifled voice.

Monte Cristo opened the letter, and read it with an indescribable
feeling of delight. It was the letter written (as our readers know) to
Julie, and signed “Sinbad the Sailor.”

“An Englishman,” said Monte Cristo, who grew uneasy at the attention
with which Julie looked at him. “An Englishman you say?”

“What was his name?” asked Monte Cristo.

“No,” returned Monte Cristo “I only guessed. I knew a Lord Wilmore, who
was constantly doing actions of this kind.”

Monte Cristo felt tears start into his eyes, and he again walked hastily
up and down the room.

“Alas,” cried Monte Cristo, striving to repress his emotion, “if Lord
Wilmore was your unknown benefactor, I fear you will never see him
again. I parted from him two years ago at Palermo, and he was then on
the point of setting out for the most remote regions; so that I fear he
will never return.”

“Madame,” replied Monte Cristo gravely, and gazing earnestly on the two
liquid pearls that trickled down Julie’s cheeks, “had Lord Wilmore seen
what I now see, he would become attached to life, for the tears you shed
would reconcile him to mankind;” and he held out his hand to Julie, who
gave him hers, carried away by the look and accent of the count.

Monte Cristo started. “What did your father tell you, M. Morrel?” said
he eagerly.

“This Count of Monte Cristo is a strange man,” said Emmanuel.

The name of Monte Cristo sent an electric shock through the young man on
the other side of the iron gate, to whom Valentine’s “I am coming” was
the customary signal of farewell.

“Now, then,” said Maximilian, leaning on the handle of his spade, “I
would give a good deal to know how it comes about that the Count of
Monte Cristo is acquainted with M. de Villefort.”

It was really the Count of Monte Cristo who had just arrived at Madame
de Villefort’s for the purpose of returning the procureur’s visit, and
at his name, as may be easily imagined, the whole house was in
confusion.

“Mademoiselle de Villefort, my step-daughter,” said Madame de Villefort
to Monte Cristo, leaning back on her sofa and motioning towards
Valentine with her hand.

“And M. de Monte Cristo, King of China, Emperor of Cochin-China,” said
the young imp, looking slyly towards his sister.

“Yes, in Italy; it was in Italy most probably,” replied Monte Cristo;
“you have travelled then in Italy, mademoiselle?”

“Ah, yes—true, mademoiselle,” exclaimed Monte Cristo as if this simple
explanation was sufficient to revive the recollection he sought. “It was
at Perugia on Corpus Christi Day, in the garden of the Hôtel des Postes,
when chance brought us together; you, Madame de Villefort, and her son;
I now remember having had the honor of meeting you.”

“And that is the case,” observed Monte Cristo. “I have seen Russians
devour, without being visibly inconvenienced, vegetable substances which
would infallibly have killed a Neapolitan or an Arab.”

“Precisely, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “but I perceive I have not
much to teach you. Allow me to compliment you on your knowledge; such
learning is very rare among ladies.”

“Well,” replied Monte Cristo “suppose, then, that this poison was
brucine, and you were to take a milligramme the first day, two
milligrammes the second day, and so on. Well, at the end of ten days you
would have taken a centigramme, at the end of twenty days, increasing
another milligramme, you would have taken three hundred centigrammes;
that is to say, a dose which you would support without inconvenience,
and which would be very dangerous for any other person who had not taken
the same precautions as yourself. Well, then, at the end of a month,
when drinking water from the same carafe, you would kill the person who
drank with you, without your perceiving, otherwise than from slight
inconvenience, that there was any poisonous substance mingled with this
water.”

“And the more, madame,” said Monte Cristo, “as the Orientals do not
confine themselves, as did Mithridates, to make a cuirass of his
poisons, but they also made them a dagger. Science becomes, in their
hands, not only a defensive weapon, but still more frequently an
offensive one; the one serves against all their physical sufferings, the
other against all their enemies. With opium, belladonna, brucea, snake-
wood, and the cherry-laurel, they put to sleep all who stand in their
way. There is not one of those women, Egyptian, Turkish, or Greek, whom
here you call ‘good women,’ who do not know how, by means of chemistry,
to stupefy a doctor, and in psychology to amaze a confessor.”

“Oh, yes, indeed, madame,” continued Monte Cristo, “the secret dramas of
the East begin with a love philtre and end with a death potion—begin
with paradise and end with—hell. There are as many elixirs of every kind
as there are caprices and peculiarities in the physical and moral nature
of humanity; and I will say further—the art of these chemists is capable
with the utmost precision to accommodate and proportion the remedy and
the bane to yearnings for love or desires for vengeance.”

“Precisely so,” cried Monte Cristo—“precisely so; and this is what I
said to my worthy Adelmonte. He reflected, smiled, and replied to me by
a Sicilian proverb, which I believe is also a French proverb, ‘My son,
the world was not made in a day—but in seven. Return on Sunday.’ On the
Sunday following I did return to him. Instead of having watered his
cabbage with arsenic, he had watered it this time with a solution of
salts, having their basis in strychnine, strychnos colubrina, as the
learned term it. Now, the cabbage had not the slightest appearance of
disease in the world, and the rabbit had not the smallest distrust; yet,
five minutes afterwards, the rabbit was dead. The fowl pecked at the
rabbit, and the next day was a dead hen. This time we were the vultures;
so we opened the bird, and this time all special symptoms had
disappeared, there were only general symptoms. There was no peculiar
indication in any organ—an excitement of the nervous system—that was it;
a case of cerebral congestion—nothing more. The fowl had not been
poisoned—she had died of apoplexy. Apoplexy is a rare disease among
fowls, I believe, but very common among men.”

“Yes,” answered Monte Cristo “happily, yes, conscience does remain; and
if it did not, how wretched we should be! After every action requiring
exertion, it is conscience that saves us, for it supplies us with a
thousand good excuses, of which we alone are judges; and these reasons,
howsoever excellent in producing sleep, would avail us but very little
before a tribunal, when we were tried for our lives. Thus Richard III.,
for instance, was marvellously served by his conscience after the
putting away of the two children of Edward IV.; in fact, he could say,
‘These two children of a cruel and persecuting king, who have inherited
the vices of their father, which I alone could perceive in their
juvenile propensities—these two children are impediments in my way of
promoting the happiness of the English people, whose unhappiness they
(the children) would infallibly have caused.’ Thus was Lady Macbeth
served by her conscience, when she sought to give her son, and not her
husband (whatever Shakespeare may say), a throne. Ah, maternal love is a
great virtue, a powerful motive—so powerful that it excuses a multitude
of things, even if, after Duncan’s death, Lady Macbeth had been at all
pricked by her conscience.”

Monte Cristo opened the tortoise-shell box, which the lady presented to
him, and inhaled the odor of the lozenges with the air of an amateur who
thoroughly appreciated their composition.

“But I,” said Monte Cristo, rising as he spoke—“I am gallant enough to
offer it you.”

“A thousand thanks, madame,” replied Monte Cristo “but I have an
engagement which I cannot break. I have promised to escort to the
Académie a Greek princess of my acquaintance who has never seen your
grand opera, and who relies on me to conduct her thither.”

Monte Cristo bowed, and left the house. Madame de Villefort remained
immersed in thought.

As to Monte Cristo the result had surpassed his utmost expectations.

“My good fellow,” said Château-Renaud, “the count is your friend and you
treat him accordingly. Do not believe what Albert is telling you,
countess; so far from the sensation excited in the Parisian circles by
the appearance of the Count of Monte Cristo having abated, I take upon
myself to declare that it is as strong as ever. His first astounding act
upon coming amongst us was to present a pair of horses, worth 32,000
francs, to Madame Danglars; his second, the almost miraculous
preservation of Madame de Villefort’s life; now it seems that he has
carried off the prize awarded by the Jockey Club. I therefore maintain,
in spite of Morcerf, that not only is the count the object of interest
at this present moment, but also that he will continue to be so for a
month longer if he pleases to exhibit an eccentricity of conduct which,
after all, may be his ordinary mode of existence.”

“Hullo,” said Albert; “it is Monte Cristo and his Greek!”

“My dear fellow,” said Debray, “you have come in the nick of time. There
is madame overwhelming me with questions respecting the count; she
insists upon it that I can tell her his birth, education, and parentage,
where he came from, and whither he is going. Being no disciple of
Cagliostro, I was wholly unable to do this; so, by way of getting out of
the scrape, I said, ‘Ask Morcerf; he has got the whole history of his
beloved Monte Cristo at his fingers’ ends;’ whereupon the baroness
signified her desire to see you.”

“Well, then, you should go and bring your Count of Monte Cristo to us.”

“Upon my word,” said Monte Cristo, “Paris is a strange city, and the
Parisians a very singular people. See that cluster of persons collected
around poor Ali, who is as much astonished as themselves; really one
might suppose he was the only Nubian they had ever beheld. Now I can
promise you, that a Frenchman might show himself in public, either in
Tunis, Constantinople, Bagdad, or Cairo, without being treated in that
way.”

Morcerf did not pursue the subject, and Monte Cristo himself fell into a
silent reverie.

The quick eye of Monte Cristo however, marked his coming; and a slight
though meaning smile passed over his lips. Haydée, whose soul seemed
centred in the business of the stage, like all unsophisticated natures,
delighted in whatever addressed itself to the eye or ear.

“No, count,” replied Monte Cristo taking the hand held out to him by the
general; “in this instance I may fairly and freely accept your thanks;
but you have already tendered them, and fully discharged your debt—if
indeed there existed one—and I feel almost mortified to find you still
reverting to the subject. May I beg of you, baroness, to honor me with
an introduction to your daughter?”

“Oh, you are no stranger—at least not by name,” replied Madame Danglars,
“and the last two or three days we have really talked of nothing but
you. Eugénie,” continued the baroness, turning towards her daughter,
“this is the Count of Monte Cristo.”

“No, mademoiselle,” said Monte Cristo, astonished at the coolness and
freedom of the question. “She is a poor unfortunate Greek left under my
care.”

“Haydée,” replied Monte Cristo.

“Did I hear rightly, monsieur,” said Monte Cristo “that you served at
Yanina?”

“There,” said Monte Cristo placing his arms around the count, and
leaning with him over the front of the box, just as Haydée, whose eyes
were occupied in examining the theatre in search of her guardian,
perceived his pale features close to Morcerf’s face. It was as if the
young girl beheld the head of Medusa. She bent forwards as though to
assure herself of the reality of what she saw, then, uttering a faint
cry, threw herself back in her seat. The sound was heard by the people
about Ali, who instantly opened the box-door.

“Very probably,” answered the count. “But do not be alarmed on her
account. Haydée’s nervous system is delicately organized, and she is
peculiarly susceptible to the odors even of flowers—nay, there are some
which cause her to faint if brought into her presence. However,”
continued Monte Cristo, drawing a small phial from his pocket, “I have
an infallible remedy.”

“With the Count of Morcerf,” answered Monte Cristo. “He tells me he
served your illustrious father, and that he owes his fortune to him.”

“Something of this I heard in Epirus,” said Monte Cristo; “but the
particulars are still unknown to me. You shall relate them to me, my
child. They are, no doubt, both curious and interesting.”

Some days after this meeting, Albert de Morcerf visited the Count of
Monte Cristo at his house in the Champs-Élysées, which had already
assumed that palace-like appearance which the count’s princely fortune
enabled him to give even to his most temporary residences. He came to
renew the thanks of Madame Danglars which had been already conveyed to
the count through the medium of a letter, signed “Baronne Danglars, née
Hermine de Servieux.”

“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “I did not expect that the affair would be so
promptly concluded.”

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo “I think M. Danglars mentioned that in a visit
which I paid him; and,” continued he, casting a side-glance at Lucien,
who was turning over the leaves of an album, “Mademoiselle Eugénie is
pretty—I think I remember that to be her name.”

“Really,” said Monte Cristo, lowering his voice, “you do not appear to
me to be very enthusiastic on the subject of this marriage.”

“Bah,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “that’s a fine reason to give. Are you
not rich yourself?”

“I confess,” observed Monte Cristo, “that I have some difficulty in
comprehending your objection to a young lady who is both rich and
beautiful.”

Monte Cristo turned away; he seemed moved by this last remark.

“My dear fellow,” said Lucien, “here is the Count of Monte Cristo, who
will say to you, as the Italians do,—

“But you were speaking of Haitians?” said Monte Cristo.

Lucien half smiled. Monte Cristo, although apparently indifferent, had
not lost one word of this conversation, and his penetrating eye had even
read a hidden secret in the embarrassed manner of the secretary. This
embarrassment had completely escaped Albert, but it caused Lucien to
shorten his visit; he was evidently ill at ease. The count, in taking
leave of him, said something in a low voice, to which he answered,
“Willingly, count; I accept.” The count returned to young Morcerf.

“Do you think so?” said Monte Cristo, with interest.

Monte Cristo started. “Oh, you do not mean that,” said he; “besides,
here comes the confirmation of my assertion.”

“He is a charming young man,” said Monte Cristo “and I felt a lively
interest in him the very first evening of my introduction, when I met
him in search of a supper, and prevailed upon him to accept a portion of
mine. He is, I think, the son of General d’Épinay?”

“Nothing is impossible,” gravely replied Monte Cristo; and taking leave
of Albert, he returned into the house, and struck the gong three times.
Bertuccio appeared.

Both the count and Baptistin had told the truth when they announced to
Morcerf the proposed visit of the major, which had served Monte Cristo
as a pretext for declining Albert’s invitation. Seven o’clock had just
struck, and M. Bertuccio, according to the command which had been given
him, had two hours before left for Auteuil, when a cab stopped at the
door, and after depositing its occupant at the gate, immediately hurried
away, as if ashamed of its employment. The visitor was about fifty-two
years of age, dressed in one of the green surtouts, ornamented with
black frogs, which have so long maintained their popularity all over
Europe. He wore trousers of blue cloth, boots tolerably clean, but not
of the brightest polish, and a little too thick in the soles, buckskin
gloves, a hat somewhat resembling in shape those usually worn by the
gendarmes, and a black cravat striped with white, which, if the
proprietor had not worn it of his own free will, might have passed for a
halter, so much did it resemble one. Such was the picturesque costume of
the person who rang at the gate, and demanded if it was not at No. 30 in
the Avenue des Champs-Élysées that the Count of Monte Cristo lived, and
who, being answered by the porter in the affirmative, entered, closed
the gate after him, and began to ascend the steps.

“Yes, yes,” said Monte Cristo. His visitor appeared slightly uneasy.
“Let me see,” said the count; “are you not the Marquis Bartolomeo
Cavalcanti?”

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo “you were a major; that is the title the French
give to the post which you filled in Italy.”

“Give it to me, then.” And Monte Cristo took the letter, which he opened
and read. The major looked at the count with his large staring eyes, and
then took a survey of the apartment, but his gaze almost immediately
reverted to the proprietor of the room.

“Yes, yes, I see. ‘Major Cavalcanti, a worthy patrician of Lucca, a
descendant of the Cavalcanti of Florence,’” continued Monte Cristo,
reading aloud, “‘possessing an income of half a million.’”

Monte Cristo raised his eyes from the paper, and bowed.

Monte Cristo resumed the perusal of the letter:

“Unhappy father,” said Monte Cristo. The count continued:

“I have the power of so doing,” said Monte Cristo. The major recovered
his self-possession.

“Ah, true,” said Monte Cristo “there is a postscript.”

“Then what?” asked Monte Cristo.

“Is it possible that a man of your standing should be embarrassed
anywhere?” said Monte Cristo.

“Certainly, at your first request.” The major’s eyes dilated with
pleasing astonishment. “But sit down,” said Monte Cristo; “really I do
not know what I have been thinking of—I have positively kept you
standing for the last quarter of an hour.”

Monte Cristo rang; Baptistin appeared. The count advanced to meet him.

“Not on your own account, surely,” replied Monte Cristo; “for a man is
above that sort of thing?”

“Oh,” said Monte Cristo “it would be quite superfluous for you to tell
me, for I already know it.”

“Well, then,” said Monte Cristo “you have all the documents with you?”

“That is unfortunate,” returned Monte Cristo.

“Fortunately, I have them, though,” said Monte Cristo.

“Well, and if he were to lose them?” said Monte Cristo.

“It would be a difficult matter to arrange,” said Monte Cristo.

“Now,” said Monte Cristo “as to the mother of the young man——”

“No, sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “besides, has she not——”

“I knew that,” said Monte Cristo; “she has been dead these ten years.”

“What would you have?” said Monte Cristo; “we are all mortal. Now, you
understand, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti, that it is useless for you to
tell people in France that you have been separated from your son for
fifteen years. Stories of gypsies, who steal children, are not at all in
vogue in this part of the world, and would not be believed. You sent him
for his education to a college in one of the provinces, and now you wish
him to complete his education in the Parisian world. That is the reason
which has induced you to leave Via Reggio, where you have lived since
the death of your wife. That will be sufficient.”

“He is,” said Monte Cristo; “when the valet de chambre came in just now,
he told me of his arrival.”

“My dear sir,” said Monte Cristo, “I understand your emotion; you must
have time to recover yourself. I will, in the meantime, go and prepare
the young man for this much-desired interview, for I presume that he is
not less impatient for it than yourself.”

“It is 40,000 francs which I now owe you,” said Monte Cristo.

“One word more,” said Monte Cristo.

“Now,” said Monte Cristo, “that you have fortified yourself against all
painful excitement, prepare yourself, my dear M. Cavalcanti, to meet
your lost Andrea.”

Saying which Monte Cristo bowed, and disappeared behind the tapestry,
leaving the major fascinated beyond expression with the delightful
reception which he had received at the hands of the count.

The Count of Monte Cristo entered the adjoining room, which Baptistin
had designated as the drawing-room, and found there a young man, of
graceful demeanor and elegant appearance, who had arrived in a cab about
half an hour previously. Baptistin had not found any difficulty in
recognizing the person who presented himself at the door for admittance.
He was certainly the tall young man with light hair, red beard, black
eyes, and brilliant complexion, whom his master had so particularly
described to him. When the count entered the room the young man was
carelessly stretched on a sofa, tapping his boot with the gold-headed
cane which he held in his hand. On perceiving the count he rose quickly.

“The Count of Monte Cristo, I believe?” said he.

“Really, all you have related to me is exceedingly interesting,” said
Monte Cristo, observing the young man with a gloomy satisfaction; “and
you have done well to conform in everything to the wishes of my friend
Sinbad; for your father is indeed here, and is seeking you.”

“Most undoubtedly,” replied Monte Cristo; “your father, Major Bartolomeo
Cavalcanti.” The expression of terror which, for the moment, had
overspread the features of the young man, had now disappeared.

“Oh, the voice of nature,” said Monte Cristo.

“Now,” replied Monte Cristo “there is only one source of uneasiness left
in your father’s mind, which is this—he is anxious to know how you have
been employed during your long absence from him, how you have been
treated by your persecutors, and if they have conducted themselves
towards you with all the deference due to your rank. Finally, he is
anxious to see if you have been fortunate enough to escape the bad moral
influence to which you have been exposed, and which is infinitely more
to be dreaded than any physical suffering; he wishes to discover if the
fine abilities with which nature had endowed you have been weakened by
want of culture; and, in short, whether you consider yourself capable of
resuming and retaining in the world the high position to which your rank
entitles you.”

Monte Cristo smiled with satisfaction; it appeared as if he had not
expected so much from M. Andrea Cavalcanti.

“Well,” said Monte Cristo in an indifferent tone, “you will do as you
please, count, for you are the master of your own actions, and are the
person most concerned in the matter, but if I were you, I would not
divulge a word of these adventures. Your history is quite a romance, and
the world, which delights in romances in yellow covers, strangely
mistrusts those which are bound in living parchment, even though they be
gilded like yourself. This is the kind of difficulty which I wished to
represent to you, my dear count. You would hardly have recited your
touching history before it would go forth to the world, and be deemed
unlikely and unnatural. You would be no longer a lost child found, but
you would be looked upon as an upstart, who had sprung up like a
mushroom in the night. You might excite a little curiosity, but it is
not everyone who likes to be made the centre of observation and the
subject of unpleasant remark.”

“Nevertheless, you must not exaggerate the evil,” said Monte Cristo,
“for by endeavoring to avoid one fault you will fall into another. You
must resolve upon one simple and single line of conduct, and for a man
of your intelligence, this plan is as easy as it is necessary; you must
form honorable friendships, and by that means counteract the prejudice
which may attach to the obscurity of your former life.”

“Yes, certainly,” interrupted Monte Cristo; “but Lord Wilmore did not
omit to inform me, my dear M. Andrea, that the season of your youth was
rather a stormy one. Ah,” said the count, watching Andrea’s countenance,
“I do not demand any confession from you; it is precisely to avoid that
necessity that your father was sent for from Lucca. You shall soon see
him. He is a little stiff and pompous in his manner, and he is
disfigured by his uniform; but when it becomes known that he has been
for eighteen years in the Austrian service, all that will be pardoned.
We are not generally very severe with the Austrians. In short, you will
find your father a very presentable person, I assure you.”

“Only a few days,” replied Monte Cristo. “His service does not allow him
to absent himself more than two or three weeks together.”

“Therefore,” said Monte Cristo feigning to mistake his
meaning—“therefore I will not, for another instant, retard the pleasure
of your meeting. Are you prepared to embrace your worthy father?”

Andrea made a low bow to the count, and entered the adjoining room.
Monte Cristo watched him till he disappeared, and then touched a spring
in a panel made to look like a picture, which, in sliding partly from
the frame, discovered to view a small opening, so cleverly contrived
that it revealed all that was passing in the drawing-room now occupied
by Cavalcanti and Andrea. The young man closed the door behind him, and
advanced towards the major, who had risen when he heard steps
approaching him.

“‘You are poor; a miserable old age awaits you. Would you like to become
rich, or at least independent? Set out immediately for Paris, and demand
of the Count of Monte Cristo, Avenue des Champs-Élysées, No. 30, the son
whom you had by the Marchesa Corsinari, and who was taken from you at
five years of age. This son is named Andrea Cavalcanti. In order that
you may not doubt the kind intention of the writer of this letter, you
will find enclosed an order for 2,400 francs, payable in Florence, at
Signor Gozzi’s; also a letter of introduction to the Count of Monte
Cristo, on whom I give you a draft of 48,000 francs. Remember to go to
the count on the 26th May at seven o’clock in the evening.

“‘Take the post-chaise which you will find waiting at the Porte de
Gênes, as you enter Nice; pass through Turin, Chambéry, and Pont-de-
Beauvoisin. Go to the Count of Monte Cristo, Avenue des Champs-Élysées,
on the 26th of May, at seven o’clock in the evening, and demand of him
your father. You are the son of the Marchese Cavalcanti and the Marchesa
Oliva Corsinari. The marquis will give you some papers which will
certify this fact, and authorize you to appear under that name in the
Parisian world. As to your rank, an annual income of 50,000 livres will
enable you to support it admirably. I enclose a draft for 5,000 livres,
payable on M. Ferrea, banker at Nice, and also a letter of introduction
to the Count of Monte Cristo, whom I have directed to supply all your
wants.

“I never once doubted your doing so.” Monte Cristo chose this moment for
re-entering the drawing-room. On hearing the sound of his footsteps, the
two men threw themselves in each other’s arms, and while they were in
the midst of this embrace, the count entered.

“Well, marquis,” said Monte Cristo, “you appear to be in no way
disappointed in the son whom your good fortune has restored to you.”

“And what are your feelings?” said Monte Cristo, turning to the young
man.

“Now, sir,” said Monte Cristo, addressing Andrea, “make your
confession.”

“You should furnish him with some of course,” replied Monte Cristo.

“Silence,” said Monte Cristo; “he does not wish you to know that it
comes from him.”

“And now, gentlemen, I wish you good-morning,” said Monte Cristo.

“We will be with you at that time,” said the major. The two Cavalcanti
bowed to the count, and left the house. Monte Cristo went to the window,
and saw them crossing the street, arm in arm.

“The Count of Monte Cristo?”

“No, indeed, I am not; for I assure you, his power over our household is
almost unlimited. Courted by my step-mother, who regards him as the
epitome of human wisdom; admired by my father, who says he has never
before heard such sublime ideas so eloquently expressed; idolized by
Edward, who, notwithstanding his fear of the count’s large black eyes,
runs to meet him the moment he arrives, and opens his hand, in which he
is sure to find some delightful present,—M. de Monte Cristo appears to
exert a mysterious and almost uncontrollable influence over all the
members of our family.”

“Alas!” said Valentine, “I see that I have given you pain. I can only
say how sincerely I ask pardon for having grieved you. But, indeed, I am
not prejudiced beyond the power of conviction. Tell me what this Count
of Monte Cristo has done for you.”

“Just as they were sitting down to table, M. de Monte Cristo arrived. He
took his seat amongst them; they played, and I won. I am almost ashamed
to say that my gains amounted to 5,000 francs. We separated at midnight.
I could not defer my pleasure, so I took a cabriolet and drove to the
horse dealer’s. Feverish and excited, I rang at the door. The person who
opened it must have taken me for a madman, for I rushed at once to the
stable. Médéah was standing at the rack, eating his hay. I immediately
put on the saddle and bridle, to which operation he lent himself with
the best grace possible; then, putting the 4,500 francs into the hands
of the astonished dealer, I proceeded to fulfil my intention of passing
the night in riding in the Champs-Élysées. As I rode by the count’s
house I perceived a light in one of the windows, and fancied I saw the
shadow of his figure moving behind the curtain. Now, Valentine, I firmly
believe that he knew of my wish to possess this horse, and that he lost
expressly to give me the means of procuring him.”

“Ma foi!” said Monte Cristo, after the first compliments were over,
“what is the matter with you, M. de Villefort? Have I arrived at the
moment when you were drawing up an indictment for a capital crime?”

“To what do you refer?” said Monte Cristo with well-feigned interest.
“Have you really met with some great misfortune?”

“True,” said Monte Cristo, “the loss of a sum of money becomes almost
immaterial with a fortune such as you possess, and to one of your
philosophic spirit.”

Monte Cristo, who pretended not to be listening, heard however, every
word that was said.

“But,” said Monte Cristo “do you not know any cause for this hatred?”

“Was not your father a Bonapartist?” asked Monte Cristo; “I think I
remember that you told me something of that kind.”

“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “it is just as I thought; it was politics
which brought Noirtier and M. d’Épinay into personal contact. Although
General d’Épinay served under Napoleon, did he not still retain royalist
sentiments? And was he not the person who was assassinated one evening
on leaving a Bonapartist meeting to which he had been invited on the
supposition that he favored the cause of the emperor?”

“Am I mistaken, then?” said Monte Cristo.

“It was a sublime and charitable thought,” said Monte Cristo, “and the
whole world should applaud it. It would be noble to see Mademoiselle
Noirtier de Villefort assuming the title of Madame Franz d’Épinay.”

Villefort shuddered and looked at Monte Cristo as if he wished to read
in his countenance the real feelings which had dictated the words he had
just uttered. But the count completely baffled the procureur, and
prevented him from discovering anything beneath the never-varying smile
he was so constantly in the habit of assuming.

“But it seems to me,” said Monte Cristo, “and I must begin by asking
your pardon for what I am about to say, that if M. Noirtier disinherits
Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to marry a man whose
father he detested, he cannot have the same cause of complaint against
this dear Edward.”

“A great pity,” said Monte Cristo.

“I agree with M. de Villefort,” said Monte Cristo, fixing his eyes on
Madame de Villefort; “and if I were sufficiently intimate with him to
allow of giving my advice, I would persuade him, since I have been told
M. d’Épinay is coming back, to settle this affair at once beyond all
possibility of revocation. I will answer for the success of a project
which will reflect so much honor on M. de Villefort.”

“Well, that is all that I wanted, and I will be guided by a counsellor
such as you are,” said he, extending his hand to Monte Cristo.
“Therefore let everyone here look upon what has passed today as if it
had not happened, and as though we had never thought of such a thing as
a change in our original plans.”

“No,” said Monte Cristo, “which is precisely the reason which renders
your kindness more meritorious,—it is in the country.”

“Did it belong to M. de Saint-Méran?” demanded Monte Cristo.

“Indeed?” returned Monte Cristo, “that is a prejudice on your part, M.
de Villefort, for which I am quite at a loss to account.”

“But I hope you will not carry your antipathy so far as to deprive me of
the pleasure of your company, sir,” said Monte Cristo.

“Oh,” said Monte Cristo, “I allow of no excuse. On Saturday, at six
o’clock. I shall be expecting you, and if you fail to come, I shall
think—for how do I know to the contrary?—that this house, which has
remained uninhabited for twenty years, must have some gloomy tradition
or dreadful legend connected with it.”

“Thank you,” said Monte Cristo; “now you must permit me to take my leave
of you.”

“Indeed madame,” said Monte Cristo: “I scarcely know if I dare tell you
where I am going.”

“No,” said Monte Cristo; “since, as I told you before, I do not wish to
comprehend it. The moment I understand it there will no longer exist a
telegraph for me; it will be nothing more than a sign from M. Duchâtel,
or from M. Montalivet, transmitted to the prefect of Bayonne, mystified
by two Greek words, têle, graphein. It is the insect with black claws,
and the awful word which I wish to retain in my imagination in all its
purity and all its importance.”

Not on the same night as he had stated, but the next morning, the Count
of Monte Cristo went out by the Barrière d’Enfer, taking the road to
Orléans. Leaving the village of Linas, without stopping at the
telegraph, which flourished its great bony arms as he passed, the count
reached the tower of Montlhéry, situated, as everyone knows, upon the
highest point of the plain of that name. At the foot of the hill the
count dismounted and began to ascend by a little winding path, about
eighteen inches wide; when he reached the summit he found himself
stopped by a hedge, upon which green fruit had succeeded to red and
white flowers.

Monte Cristo looked for the entrance to the enclosure, and was not long
in finding a little wooden gate, working on willow hinges, and fastened
with a nail and string. The count soon mastered the mechanism, the gate
opened, and he then found himself in a little garden, about twenty feet
long by twelve wide, bounded on one side by part of the hedge, which
contained the ingenious contrivance we have called a gate, and on the
other by the old tower, covered with ivy and studded with wall-flowers.

Monte Cristo stopped after having closed the gate and fastened the
string to the nail, and cast a look around.

Suddenly he struck against something crouching behind a wheelbarrow
filled with leaves; the something rose, uttering an exclamation of
astonishment, and Monte Cristo found himself facing a man about fifty
years old, who was plucking strawberries, which he was placing upon
grape leaves. He had twelve leaves and about as many strawberries,
which, on rising suddenly, he let fall from his hand.

“You are gathering your crop, sir?” said Monte Cristo, smiling.

“Certainly, it is wrong,” said Monte Cristo, “but you should take into
consideration the youth and greediness of the delinquent.”

“Indeed, I should think not,” replied Monte Cristo; “dormice are bad
neighbors for us who do not eat them preserved, as the Romans did.”

Monte Cristo had seen enough. Every man has a devouring passion in his
heart, as every fruit has its worm; that of the telegraph man was
horticulture. He began gathering the grape-leaves which screened the sun
from the grapes, and won the heart of the gardener.

“Is it possible,” said Monte Cristo to himself, “that I can have met
with a man that has no ambition? That would spoil my plans.”

Monte Cristo entered the tower, which was divided into three stories.
The tower contained implements, such as spades, rakes, watering-pots,
hung against the wall; this was all the furniture. The second was the
man’s conventional abode, or rather sleeping-place; it contained a few
poor articles of household furniture—a bed, a table, two chairs, a stone
pitcher—and some dry herbs, hung up to the ceiling, which the count
recognized as sweet peas, and of which the good man was preserving the
seeds; he had labelled them with as much care as if he had been master
botanist in the Jardin des Plantes.

“Does it require much study to learn the art of telegraphing?” asked
Monte Cristo.

Monte Cristo looked at the room. They passed to the third story; it was
the telegraph room. Monte Cristo looked in turn at the two iron handles
by which the machine was worked. “It is very interesting,” he said, “but
it must be very tedious for a lifetime.”

“Poor humanity!” murmured Monte Cristo.

“I have, then, five minutes,” said Monte Cristo to himself; “it is more
time than I require. My dear sir, will you allow me to ask you a
question?”

“Has it ever happened to you?” said Monte Cristo.

“I think I can effectually force you;” and Monte Cristo drew another
packet from his pocket. “Here are ten thousand more francs,” he said,
“with the fifteen thousand already in your pocket, they will make
twenty-five thousand. With five thousand you can buy a pretty little
house with two acres of land; the remaining twenty thousand will bring
you in a thousand francs a year.”

“Come, take them,” and Monte Cristo forced the bank-notes into his hand.

“To repeat these signs.” Monte Cristo took a paper from his pocket, upon
which were drawn three signs, with numbers to indicate the order in
which they were to be worked.

“Now you are rich,” said Monte Cristo.

“Listen, friend,” said Monte Cristo. “I do not wish to cause you any
remorse; believe me, then, when I swear to you that you have wronged no
man, but on the contrary have benefited mankind.”

“Good,” said Monte Cristo to Morrel, who was at his house when the news
arrived of the strange reverse of fortune of which Danglars had been the
victim, “I have just made a discovery for twenty-five thousand francs,
for which I would have paid a hundred thousand.”

At first sight, the exterior of the house at Auteuil gave no indications
of splendor, nothing one would expect from the destined residence of the
magnificent Count of Monte Cristo; but this simplicity was according to
the will of its master, who positively ordered nothing to be altered
outside. The splendor was within. Indeed, almost before the door opened,
the scene changed.

At five o’clock precisely, the count arrived before the house at
Auteuil, followed by Ali. Bertuccio was awaiting this arrival with
impatience, mingled with uneasiness; he hoped for some compliments,
while, at the same time, he feared to have frowns. Monte Cristo
descended into the courtyard, walked all over the house, without giving
any sign of approbation or pleasure, until he entered his bedroom,
situated on the opposite side to the closed room; then he approached a
little piece of furniture, made of rosewood, which he had noticed at a
previous visit.

“I should think so,—a horse that cost 5,000 francs!” said Monte Cristo,
in the tone which a father would use towards a son.

“Then they follow you?” asked Monte Cristo.

The instant Debray had touched the ground, he was at the carriage-door.
He offered his hand to the baroness, who, descending, took it with a
peculiarity of manner imperceptible to everyone but Monte Cristo. But
nothing escaped the count’s notice, and he observed a little note,
passed with the facility that indicates frequent practice, from the hand
of Madame Danglars to that of the minister’s secretary.

Madame Danglars threw a rapid and inquiring glance which could only be
interpreted by Monte Cristo, around the courtyard, over the peristyle,
and across the front of the house, then, repressing a slight emotion,
which must have been seen on her countenance if she had not kept her
color, she ascended the steps, saying to Morrel:

Morrel smiled with an expression very like a grimace, and then turned
round to Monte Cristo, as if to ask him to extricate him from his
embarrassment. The count understood him.

“You see my position, madame,” said Morrel, bestowing a grateful smile
on Monte Cristo.

Madame Danglars seldom allowed remarks of this kind to pass unnoticed,
but, to the surprise of the young people, she pretended not to hear it,
and said nothing. Monte Cristo smiled at her unusual humility, and
showed her two immense porcelain jars, over which wound marine plants,
of a size and delicacy that nature alone could produce. The baroness was
astonished.

“Ah! madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “you must not ask of us, the
manufacturers of fine porcelain, such a question. It is the work of
another age, constructed by the genii of earth and water.”

“Sir,” said Monte Cristo to him, “I do not recommend my pictures to you,
who possess such splendid paintings; but, nevertheless, here are two by
Hobbema, a Paul Potter, a Mieris, two by Gerard Douw, a Raphael, a Van
Dyck, a Zurbaran, and two or three by Murillo, worth looking at.”

“Which, I believe, does not contain one?” said Monte Cristo.

“Who are those gentlemen?” asked Danglars of Monte Cristo.

“The baron appears thoughtful today,” said Monte Cristo to her; “are
they going to put him in the ministry?”

They entered. M. de Villefort, notwithstanding his self-control, was
visibly affected, and when Monte Cristo touched his hand, he felt it
tremble.

“Certainly, women alone know how to dissimulate,” said Monte Cristo to
himself, glancing at Madame Danglars, who was smiling on the procureur,
and embracing his wife.

This time Bertuccio would have uttered an exclamation, had not a look
from Monte Cristo silenced him.

The Count of Monte Cristo offered his arm to Madame de Villefort. “M. de
Villefort,” he said, “will you conduct the Baroness Danglars?”

The repast was magnificent; Monte Cristo had endeavored completely to
overturn the Parisian ideas, and to feed the curiosity as much as the
appetite of his guests. It was an Oriental feast that he offered to
them, but of such a kind as the Arabian fairies might be supposed to
prepare. Every delicious fruit that the four quarters of the globe could
provide was heaped in vases from China and jars from Japan. Rare birds,
retaining their most brilliant plumage, enormous fish, spread upon
massive silver dishes, together with every wine produced in the
Archipelago, Asia Minor, or the Cape, sparkling in bottles, whose
grotesque shape seemed to give an additional flavor to the draught,—all
these, like one of the displays with which Apicius of old gratified his
guests, passed in review before the eyes of the astonished Parisians,
who understood that it was possible to expend a thousand louis upon a
dinner for ten persons, but only on the condition of eating pearls, like
Cleopatra, or drinking refined gold, like Lorenzo de’ Medici.

Monte Cristo noticed the general astonishment, and began laughing and
joking about it.

“Well, this is just what amuses me,” said Monte Cristo. “I am like
Nero—cupitor impossibilium; and that is what is amusing you at this
moment. This fish, which seems so exquisite to you, is very likely no
better than perch or salmon; but it seemed impossible to procure it, and
here it is.”

“Merely because one might have died,” carelessly answered Monte Cristo.

“True,” said Monte Cristo; “but what would be the use of living eighteen
hundred years after Lucullus, if we can do no better than he could?”

“Why not? I am fond of grass and shade,” said Monte Cristo.

“Yes, madame,” said Monte Cristo; “but I preferred having an entrance
which would allow me to see the Bois de Boulogne over my gate.”

“It appears so,” replied Monte Cristo.

Villefort, who had hitherto not tasted the three or four glasses of rare
wine which were placed before him, here took one, and drank it off.
Monte Cristo allowed a short time to elapse, and then said:

“There was, above all, one room,” continued Monte Cristo, “very plain in
appearance, hung with red damask, which, I know not why, appeared to me
quite dramatic.”

“Can we account for instinct?” said Monte Cristo. “Are there not some
places where we seem to breathe sadness?—why, we cannot tell. It is a
chain of recollections—an idea which carries you back to other times, to
other places—which, very likely, have no connection with the present
time and place. And there is something in this room which reminds me
forcibly of the chamber of the Marquise de Ganges10 or Desdemona. Stay,
since we have finished dinner, I will show it to you, and then we will
take coffee in the garden. After dinner, the play.”

Monte Cristo looked inquiringly at his guests. Madame de Villefort rose,
Monte Cristo did the same, and the rest followed their example.
Villefort and Madame Danglars remained for a moment, as if rooted to
their seats; they questioned each other with vague and stupid glances.

The others, attracted by curiosity, were already scattered in different
parts of the house; for they thought the visit would not be limited to
the one room, and that, at the same time, they would obtain a view of
the rest of the building, of which Monte Cristo had created a palace.
Each one went out by the open doors. Monte Cristo waited for the two who
remained; then, when they had passed, he brought up the rear, and on his
face was a smile, which, if they could have understood it, would have
alarmed them much more than a visit to the room they were about to
enter. They began by walking through the apartments, many of which were
fitted up in the Eastern style, with cushions and divans instead of
beds, and pipes instead of furniture. The drawing-rooms were decorated
with the rarest pictures by the old masters, the boudoirs hung with
draperies from China, of fanciful colors, fantastic design, and
wonderful texture. At length they arrived at the famous room. There was
nothing particular about it, excepting that, although daylight had
disappeared, it was not lighted, and everything in it was old-fashioned,
while the rest of the rooms had been redecorated. These two causes were
enough to give it a gloomy aspect.

“Is it not so?” asked Monte Cristo. “Look at that large clumsy bed, hung
with such gloomy, blood-colored drapery! And those two crayon portraits,
that have faded from the dampness; do they not seem to say, with their
pale lips and staring eyes, ‘We have seen’?”

“And then,” said Monte Cristo, “this is not all.”

“Yes, but you have not this little staircase,” said Monte Cristo,
opening a door concealed by the drapery. “Look at it, and tell me what
you think of it.”

“Can you imagine,” said Monte Cristo, “some Othello or Abbé de Ganges,
one stormy, dark night, descending these stairs step by step, carrying a
load, which he wishes to hide from the sight of man, if not from God?”

“It is very evident what is the matter with her,” said Madame de
Villefort; “M. de Monte Cristo is relating horrible stories to us,
doubtless intending to frighten us to death.”

“Are you really frightened, madame?” said Monte Cristo.

“Ah, yes,” said Monte Cristo smiling; “it is all a matter of
imagination. Why should we not imagine this the apartment of an honest
mother? And this bed with red hangings, a bed visited by the goddess
Lucina? And that mysterious staircase, the passage through which, not to
disturb their sleep, the doctor and nurse pass, or even the father
carrying the sleeping child?”

“Oh, mon Dieu!” said Monte Cristo, “and I have forgotten my smelling-
bottle!”

“Ah,” said Monte Cristo, taking it from her hand.

Madame Danglars was carried into the adjoining room; Monte Cristo
dropped a very small portion of the red liquid upon her lips; she
returned to consciousness.

“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “you may believe me if you like, but it is my
opinion that a crime has been committed in this house.”

“Ah,” replied Monte Cristo, “since that is the case, I will take
advantage of his presence to make my declaration.”

“There has been a crime,” said Monte Cristo. “Come this way, gentlemen;
come, M. Villefort, for a declaration to be available, should be made
before the competent authorities.”

“Stay,” said Monte Cristo, “here, in this very spot” (and he stamped
upon the ground), “I had the earth dug up and fresh mould put in, to
refresh these old trees; well, my man, digging, found a box, or rather,
the iron-work of a box, in the midst of which was the skeleton of a
newly born infant.”

Monte Cristo felt the arm of Madame Danglars stiffen, while that of
Villefort trembled.

“I think so; am I not right, M. de Villefort?” asked Monte Cristo.

Monte Cristo, seeing that the two persons for whom he had prepared this
scene could scarcely endure it, and not wishing to carry it too far,
said:

Monte Cristo bowed, and went to Madame de Villefort.

The evening passed on; Madame de Villefort expressed a desire to return
to Paris, which Madame Danglars had not dared to do, notwithstanding the
uneasiness she experienced. On his wife’s request, M. de Villefort was
the first to give the signal of departure. He offered a seat in his
landau to Madame Danglars, that she might be under the care of his wife.
As for M. Danglars, absorbed in an interesting conversation with M.
Cavalcanti, he paid no attention to anything that was passing. While
Monte Cristo had begged the smelling-bottle of Madame de Villefort, he
had noticed the approach of Villefort to Madame Danglars, and he soon
guessed all that had passed between them, though the words had been
uttered in so low a voice as hardly to be heard by Madame Danglars.
Without opposing their arrangements, he allowed Morrel, Château-Renaud,
and Debray to leave on horseback, and the ladies in M. de Villefort’s
carriage. Danglars, more and more delighted with Major Cavalcanti, had
offered him a seat in his carriage. Andrea Cavalcanti found his tilbury
waiting at the door; the groom, in every respect a caricature of the
English fashion, was standing on tiptoe to hold a large iron-gray horse.

At that moment a hand touched his shoulder. The young man turned round,
thinking that Danglars or Monte Cristo had forgotten something they
wished to tell him, and had returned just as they were starting. But
instead of either of these, he saw nothing but a strange face, sunburnt,
and encircled by a beard, with eyes brilliant as carbuncles, and a smile
upon the mouth which displayed a perfect set of white teeth, pointed and
sharp as the wolf’s or jackal’s. A red handkerchief encircled his gray
head; torn and filthy garments covered his large bony limbs, which
seemed as though, like those of a skeleton, they would rattle as he
walked; and the hand with which he leaned upon the young man’s shoulder,
and which was the first thing Andrea saw, seemed of gigantic size.

“The Count of Monte Cristo.”

Monte Cristo was at home; only he was engaged with someone and begged
Danglars to wait for a moment in the drawing-room. While the banker was
waiting in the anteroom, the door opened, and a man dressed as an abbé
and doubtless more familiar with the house than he was, came in and
instead of waiting, merely bowed, passed on to the farther apartments,
and disappeared.

A minute after the door by which the priest had entered reopened, and
Monte Cristo appeared.

“Ah, indeed?” said Monte Cristo. “Have you had another fall at the
Bourse?”

“So that,” said Monte Cristo, “you have lost nearly 1,700,000 francs
this month.”

“Diable!” said Monte Cristo compassionately, “it is a hard blow for a
third-rate fortune.”

“Certainly,” continued Monte Cristo, “I make three assortments in
fortune—first-rate, second-rate, and third-rate fortunes. I call those
first-rate which are composed of treasures one possesses under one’s
hand, such as mines, lands, and funded property, in such states as
France, Austria, and England, provided these treasures and property form
a total of about a hundred millions; I call those second-rate fortunes,
that are gained by manufacturing enterprises, joint-stock companies,
viceroyalties, and principalities, not drawing more than 1,500,000
francs, the whole forming a capital of about fifty millions; finally, I
call those third-rate fortunes, which are composed of a fluctuating
capital, dependent upon the will of others, or upon chances which a
bankruptcy involves or a false telegram shakes, such as banks,
speculations of the day—in fact, all operations under the influence of
greater or less mischances, the whole bringing in a real or fictitious
capital of about fifteen millions. I think this is about your position,
is it not?”

“Let us imagine seven such months,” continued Monte Cristo, in the same
tone. “Tell me, have you ever thought that seven times 1,700,000 francs
make nearly twelve millions? No, you have not;—well, you are right, for
if you indulged in such reflections, you would never risk your
principal, which is to the speculator what the skin is to civilized man.
We have our clothes, some more splendid than others,—this is our credit;
but when a man dies he has only his skin; in the same way, on retiring
from business, you have nothing but your real principal of about five or
six millions, at the most; for third-rate fortunes are never more than a
fourth of what they appear to be, like the locomotive on a railway, the
size of which is magnified by the smoke and steam surrounding it. Well,
out of the five or six millions which form your real capital, you have
just lost nearly two millions, which must, of course, in the same degree
diminish your credit and fictitious fortune; to follow out my simile,
your skin has been opened by bleeding, and this if repeated three or
four times will cause death—so pay attention to it, my dear Monsieur
Danglars. Do you want money? Do you wish me to lend you some?”

“So much the better. I congratulate you, my dear M. Danglars,” said
Monte Cristo; “I see I was deceived, and that you belong to the class of
second-rate fortunes.”

“I think I may aspire to that honor,” said Danglars with a smile, which
reminded Monte Cristo of the sickly moons which bad artists are so fond
of daubing into their pictures of ruins. “But, while we are speaking of
business,” Danglars added, pleased to find an opportunity of changing
the subject, “tell me what I am to do for M. Cavalcanti.”

Monte Cristo nodded his head in token of assent.

Monte Cristo took no notice of this ill-natured remark.

“A proof of great humility or great pride,” said Monte Cristo.

“Oh, yes; has not a fatal chance revealed all this? Was it not by chance
the Count of Monte Cristo bought that house? Was it not by chance he
caused the earth to be dug up? Is it not by chance that the unfortunate
child was disinterred under the trees?—that poor innocent offspring of
mine, which I never even kissed, but for whom I wept many, many tears.
Ah, my heart clung to the count when he mentioned the dear spoil found
beneath the flowers.”

“I mean that M. de Monte Cristo, digging underneath these trees, found
neither skeleton nor chest, because neither of them was there!”

“You understand, then, that if it were so,” said he, rising in his turn,
and approaching the baroness, to speak to her in a lower tone, “we are
lost. This child lives, and someone knows it lives—someone is in
possession of our secret; and since Monte Cristo speaks before us of a
child disinterred, when that child could not be found, it is he who is
in possession of our secret.”

“But,” replied Madame Danglars, “the Count of Monte Cristo can know
nothing, or he would not seek our society as he does.”

The same day during the interview between Madame Danglars and the
procureur, a travelling-carriage entered the Rue du Helder, passed
through the gateway of No. 27, and stopped in the yard. In a moment the
door was opened, and Madame de Morcerf alighted, leaning on her son’s
arm. Albert soon left her, ordered his horses, and having arranged his
toilet, drove to the Champs-Élysées, to the house of Monte Cristo.

The count received him with his habitual smile. It was a strange thing
that no one ever appeared to advance a step in that man’s favor. Those
who would, as it were, force a passage to his heart, found an impassable
barrier. Morcerf, who ran towards him with open arms, was chilled as he
drew near, in spite of the friendly smile, and simply held out his hand.
Monte Cristo shook it coldly, according to his invariable practice.

“That is extremely kind of you,” said Monte Cristo with a tone of
perfect indifference.

“Had you commissioned me?” said Monte Cristo, feigning uneasiness.

“Possibly,” said Monte Cristo, “I have indeed thought of you, but the
magnetic wire I was guiding acted, indeed, without my knowledge.”

“And this,” said Monte Cristo, “is your opinion of your intended
spouse?”

Monte Cristo turned pale, and looked at Albert, while playing with some
magnificent pistols.

“Thus I shall rejoice when Mademoiselle Eugénie perceives I am but a
pitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundred thousand francs as she has
millions.” Monte Cristo smiled. “One plan occurred to me,” continued
Albert; “Franz likes all that is eccentric; I tried to make him fall in
love with Mademoiselle Danglars; but in spite of four letters, written
in the most alluring style, he invariably answered: ‘My eccentricity may
be great, but it will not make me break my promise.’”

“I?” said Monte Cristo; “my dear viscount, how have you discovered that
I did not like M. Franz! I like everyone.”

“Let us not mistake,” said Monte Cristo; “I love everyone as God
commands us to love our neighbor, as Christians; but I thoroughly hate
but a few. Let us return to M. Franz d’Épinay. Did you say he was
coming?”

“There is, then, one,” said Monte Cristo, “whom you do not condemn like
poor Danglars?”

“Indeed, my dear sir,” said Monte Cristo, “you are revoltingly foppish.”

“The Comtesse de Morcerf?” said Monte Cristo, starting.

“Yes, I promised you.” The Count watched Albert, waving his hand to him.
When he had mounted his phaeton, Monte Cristo turned, and seeing
Bertuccio, “What news?” said he.

M. de Villefort kept the promise he had made to Madame Danglars, to
endeavor to find out how the Count of Monte Cristo had discovered the
history of the house at Auteuil. He wrote the same day for the required
information to M. de Boville, who, from having been an inspector of
prisons, was promoted to a high office in the police; and the latter
begged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would be most likely
to give him full particulars. At the end of the second day M. de
Villefort received the following note:

“The person called the Count of Monte Cristo is an intimate acquaintance
of Lord Wilmore, a rich foreigner, who is sometimes seen in Paris and
who is there at this moment; he is also known to the Abbé Busoni, a
Sicilian priest, of high repute in the East, where he has done much
good.”

“Zaccone?—is not his name Monte Cristo?”

“Monte Cristo is the name of an estate, or, rather, of a rock, and not a
family name.”

“Do you know this Island of Monte Cristo?”

“Do you think the Count of Monte Cristo had ever been in France before
he made this visit to Paris?”

“Do you know with what design M. de Monte Cristo purchased a house at
Auteuil?”

Then began the questions, which were similar to those which had been
addressed to the Abbé Busoni. But as Lord Wilmore, in the character of
the count’s enemy, was less restrained in his answers, they were more
numerous; he described the youth of Monte Cristo, who he said, at ten
years of age, entered the service of one of the petty sovereigns of
India who make war on the English. It was there Wilmore had first met
him and fought against him; and in that war Zaccone had been taken
prisoner, sent to England, and consigned to the hulks, whence he had
escaped by swimming. Then began his travels, his duels, his caprices;
then the insurrection in Greece broke out, and he had served in the
Grecian ranks. While in that service he had discovered a silver mine in
the mountains of Thessaly, but he had been careful to conceal it from
everyone. After the battle of Navarino, when the Greek government was
consolidated, he asked of King Otho a mining grant for that district,
which was given him. Hence that immense fortune, which, in Lord
Wilmore’s opinion, possibly amounted to one or two millions per annum,—a
precarious fortune, which might be momentarily lost by the failure of
the mine.

“Will not the Count of Monte Cristo be here tonight?”

“You were going to ask me if the Count of Monte Cristo had arrived, or
was expected.”

“You know that he has another name besides Monte Cristo?”

“Monte Cristo is the name of an island, and he has a family name.”

“I have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentleman at Auteuil,
at the house of the Count of Monte Cristo,” replied Madame de Villefort,
turning away with marked coldness of manner.

Meanwhile he advanced through the assemblage of guests under a battery
of curious glances towards Madame de Morcerf, who, standing before a
mantle-piece ornamented with flowers, had seen his entrance in a
looking-glass placed opposite the door, and was prepared to receive him.
She turned towards him with a serene smile just at the moment he was
bowing to her. No doubt she fancied the count would speak to her, while
on his side the count thought she was about to address him; but both
remained silent, and after a mere bow, Monte Cristo directed his steps
to Albert, who received him cordially.

“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo; “and so those gentlemen down there are men
of great talent. I should not have guessed it. And for what kind of
talent are they celebrated? You know there are different sorts.”

“Come,” said Monte Cristo, “this cross seems to me to be wisely awarded.
I suppose, had he found another additional vertebra, they would have
made him a commander.”

“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo; “so this gentleman is an Academician?”

“Bravo, viscount,” said Monte Cristo, smiling; “you are a delightful
cicerone. And now you will do me a favor, will you not?”

“Unfortunately,” said Monte Cristo, “one’s title to a millionaire does
not last for life, like that of baron, peer of France, or academician;
for example, the millionaires Franck & Poulmann, of Frankfurt, who have
just become bankrupts.”

“Then,” said Monte Cristo, “here are 200,000 francs gone after——”

“Hush, do not mention these things,” said Danglars; then, approaching
Monte Cristo, he added, “especially before young M. Cavalcanti;” after
which he smiled, and turned towards the young man in question.

Albert had left the count to speak to his mother, Danglars to converse
with young Cavalcanti; Monte Cristo was for an instant alone. Meanwhile
the heat became excessive. The footmen were hastening through the rooms
with waiters loaded with ices. Monte Cristo wiped the perspiration from
his forehead, but drew back when the waiter was presented to him; he
took no refreshment. Madame de Morcerf did not lose sight of Monte
Cristo; she saw that he took nothing, and even noticed his gesture of
refusal.

Turning towards Monte Cristo, she added, “count, will you oblige me with
your arm?”

“No, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “but you see I make no resistance.”

The count looked at Mercédès as if to interrogate her, but she continued
to walk on in silence, and he refrained from speaking. They reached the
building, ornamented with magnificent fruits, which ripen at the
beginning of July in the artificial temperature which takes the place of
the sun, so frequently absent in our climate. The countess left the arm
of Monte Cristo, and gathered a bunch of Muscatel grapes.

“Pray excuse me, madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “but I never eat
Muscatel grapes.”

“I have suffered deeply, madame,” answered Monte Cristo.

“I, married?” exclaimed Monte Cristo, shuddering; “who could have told
you so?”

“I hate them? Not at all; why should I?” The countess placed herself
before Monte Cristo, still holding in her hand a portion of the perfumed
grapes.

“Madame, I never eat Muscatel grapes,” replied Monte Cristo, as if the
subject had not been mentioned before. The countess dashed the grapes
into the nearest thicket, with a gesture of despair.

“Inflexible man!” she murmured. Monte Cristo remained as unmoved as if
the reproach had not been addressed to him.

And she took two or three steps forward. Monte Cristo watched her with
an air so thoughtful, and so full of affectionate admiration, that she
turned back and grasped his hand; at the same time she seized that of
her son, and joined them together.

‘Foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s
eyes;’ but, like a phosphoric light, they rise but to mislead. The story
has been told by the Corsican to some priest, who in his turn has
repeated it. M. de Monte Cristo may have heard it, and to enlighten
himself——

“But why should he wish to enlighten himself upon the subject?” asked
Villefort, after a moment’s reflection, “what interest can this M. de
Monte Cristo or M. Zaccone,—son of a shipowner of Malta, discoverer of a
mine in Thessaly, now visiting Paris for the first time,—what interest,
I say, can he take in discovering a gloomy, mysterious, and useless fact
like this? However, among all the incoherent details given to me by the
Abbé Busoni and by Lord Wilmore, by that friend and that enemy, one
thing appears certain and clear in my opinion—that in no period, in no
case, in no circumstance, could there have been any contact between him
and me.”

“I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since,” said Morrel; “we
were speaking, he of the sorrow your family had experienced, and I of
your grief, when a carriage rolled into the courtyard. Never, till then,
had I placed any confidence in presentiments, but now I cannot help
believing them, Valentine. At the sound of that carriage I shuddered;
soon I heard steps on the staircase, which terrified me as much as the
footsteps of the commander did Don Juan. The door at last opened; Albert
de Morcerf entered first, and I began to hope my fears were vain, when,
after him, another young man advanced, and the count exclaimed: ‘Ah,
here is the Baron Franz d’Épinay!’ I summoned all my strength and
courage to my support. Perhaps I turned pale and trembled, but certainly
I smiled; and five minutes after I left, without having heard one word
that had passed.”

Morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news that the contract
was to be signed that evening. Then he went to call on Monte Cristo and
heard still more. Franz had been to announce the ceremony, and Madame de
Villefort had also written to beg the count to excuse her not inviting
him; the death of M. de Saint-Méran and the dangerous illness of his
widow would cast a gloom over the meeting which she would regret should
be shared by the count whom she wished every happiness.

It is easy to suppose that Morrel’s agitation would not escape the
count’s penetrating eye. Monte Cristo was more affectionate than
ever,—indeed, his manner was so kind that several times Morrel was on
the point of telling him all. But he recalled the promise he had made to
Valentine, and kept his secret.

Such was the state of society in Paris at the period we bring before our
readers, when Monte Cristo went one evening to pay M. Danglars a visit.
M. Danglars was out, but the count was asked to go and see the baroness,
and he accepted the invitation. It was never without a nervous shudder,
since the dinner at Auteuil, and the events which followed it, that
Madame Danglars heard Monte Cristo’s name announced. If he did not come,
the painful sensation became most intense; if, on the contrary, he
appeared, his noble countenance, his brilliant eyes, his amiability, his
polite attention even towards Madame Danglars, soon dispelled every
impression of fear. It appeared impossible to the baroness that a man of
such delightfully pleasing manners should entertain evil designs against
her; besides, the most corrupt minds only suspect evil when it would
answer some interested end—useless injury is repugnant to every mind.

When Monte Cristo entered the boudoir, to which we have already once
introduced our readers, and where the baroness was examining some
drawings, which her daughter passed to her after having looked at them
with M. Cavalcanti, his presence soon produced its usual effect, and it
was with smiles that the baroness received the count, although she had
been a little disconcerted at the announcement of his name. The latter
took in the whole scene at a glance.

Mademoiselle Danglars was still the same—cold, beautiful, and satirical.
Not one of these glances, nor one sigh, was lost on her; they might have
been said to fall on the shield of Minerva, which some philosophers
assert protected sometimes the breast of Sappho. Eugénie bowed coldly to
the count, and availed herself of the first moment when the conversation
became earnest to escape to her study, whence very soon two cheerful and
noisy voices being heard in connection with occasional notes of the
piano assured Monte Cristo that Mademoiselle Danglars preferred to his
society and to that of M. Cavalcanti the company of Mademoiselle Louise
d’Armilly, her singing teacher.

The banker soon returned. His first look was certainly directed towards
Monte Cristo, but the second was for Andrea. As for his wife, he bowed
to her, as some husbands do to their wives, but in a way that bachelors
will never comprehend, until a very extensive code is published on
conjugal life.

Monte Cristo cast one rapid and curious glance round this sanctum; it
was the first time he had ever seen Mademoiselle d’Armilly, of whom he
had heard much.

The count soon heard Andrea’s voice, singing a Corsican song,
accompanied by the piano. While the count smiled at hearing this song,
which made him lose sight of Andrea in the recollection of Benedetto,
Madame Danglars was boasting to Monte Cristo of her husband’s strength
of mind, who that very morning had lost three or four hundred thousand
francs by a failure at Milan. The praise was well deserved, for had not
the count heard it from the baroness, or by one of those means by which
he knew everything, the baron’s countenance would not have led him to
suspect it.

“Hem,” thought Monte Cristo, “he begins to conceal his losses; a month
since he boasted of them.”

“What is it?” said Monte Cristo.

“Stay,” said Monte Cristo, as though he had not observed her confusion,
“I have heard of a lucky hit that was made yesterday on the Neapolitan
bonds.”

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo, “I have heard that; but, as Claudius said to
Hamlet, ‘it is a law of nature; their fathers died before them, and they
mourned their loss; they will die before their children, who will, in
their turn, grieve for them.’”

“And Mademoiselle d’Armilly,” said the banker; “do you consider her no
one?” Then, turning to Monte Cristo, he said, “Prince Cavalcanti is a
charming young man, is he not? But is he really a prince?”

“I will not answer for it,” said Monte Cristo. “His father was
introduced to me as a marquis, so he ought to be a count; but I do not
think he has much claim to that title.”

“Oh, you are a thorough democrat,” said Monte Cristo, smiling.

She looked at him in amazement. Monte Cristo appeared to be unconscious
of what passed. Albert entered, looking very handsome and in high
spirits. He bowed politely to the baroness, familiarly to Danglars, and
affectionately to Monte Cristo. Then turning to the baroness: “May I ask
how Mademoiselle Danglars is?” said he.

Albert retained his calm and indifferent manner; he might feel perhaps
annoyed, but he knew Monte Cristo’s eye was on him. “M. Cavalcanti has a
fine tenor voice,” said he, “and Mademoiselle Eugénie a splendid
soprano, and then she plays the piano like Thalberg. The concert must be
a delightful one.”

Danglars was quite annoyed by the young man’s indifference. He took
Monte Cristo aside.

“Oh,” said Monte Cristo, “my fondness may blind me, but I assure you I
consider Morcerf a charming young man who will render your daughter
happy and will sooner or later attain a certain amount of distinction,
and his father’s position is good.”

“Hem,” said Monte Cristo in his turn.

“Oh, don’t worry about me, Sir Mocker,” said Danglars; then turning to
Monte Cristo he said:

“I shall soon return,” said the banker to Monte Cristo; “wait for me. I
shall, perhaps, have something to say to you.” And he went out.

Cavalcanti, being left alone, turned to Monte Cristo.

They passed into the next drawing-room, where tea was prepared. Just as
they were beginning, in the English fashion, to leave the spoons in
their cups, the door again opened and Danglars entered, visibly
agitated. Monte Cristo observed it particularly, and by a look asked the
banker for an explanation.

Danglars cast another suspicious look towards him without answering, and
Monte Cristo turned away to conceal the expression of pity which passed
over his features, but which was gone in a moment.

Monte Cristo smiled significantly.

“If you compliment her at all, let it be on her voice, at least,” said
Monte Cristo.

Meanwhile, Danglars, stooping to Monte Cristo’s ear, “Your advice was
excellent,” said he; “there is a whole history connected with the names
Fernand and Yanina.”

“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo.

“Very well.” The count made a sign to Albert and they bowed to the
ladies, and took their leave, Albert perfectly indifferent to
Mademoiselle Danglars’ contempt, Monte Cristo reiterating his advice to
Madame Danglars on the prudence a banker’s wife should exercise in
providing for the future.

“To what do you allude?” asked Monte Cristo.

“I am determined to try and be on good terms with everybody, at all
events,” said Monte Cristo. “But apropos of Debray, how is it that I
have not seen him lately at the baron’s house?”

“Do you think he suspects?” said Monte Cristo with charming artlessness.

“But then, what can have led to the quarrel between Danglars and Debray?
They seemed to understand each other so well,” said Monte Cristo with
renewed energy.

“Here we are,” said Monte Cristo; “it is only half-past ten o’clock,
come in.”

“There it is, then,” said Monte Cristo, as he stepped out of the
carriage. They both went into the house; the drawing-room was lighted
up—they went in there. “You will make tea for us, Baptistin,” said the
count. Baptistin left the room without waiting to answer, and in two
seconds reappeared, bringing on a tray, all that his master had ordered,
ready prepared, and appearing to have sprung from the ground, like the
repasts which we read of in fairy tales.

Monte Cristo took the gong and struck it once. In about the space of a
second a private door opened, and Ali appeared, bringing two chibouques
filled with excellent latakia.

“Oh no, it is as simple as possible,” replied Monte Cristo. “Ali knows I
generally smoke while I am taking my tea or coffee; he has heard that I
ordered tea, and he also knows that I brought you home with me; when I
summoned him he naturally guessed the reason of my doing so, and as he
comes from a country where hospitality is especially manifested through
the medium of smoking, he naturally concludes that we shall smoke in
company, and therefore brings two chibouques instead of one—and now the
mystery is solved.”

“Really, count, you do nothing, and have nothing like other people. The
slave of the Count of Monte Cristo! Why, it is a rank of itself in
France, and from the way in which you lavish money, it is a place that
must be worth a hundred thousand francs a year.”

“Let us go in,” said Monte Cristo.

Haydée was awaiting her visitors in the first room of her apartments,
which was the drawing-room. Her large eyes were dilated with surprise
and expectation, for it was the first time that any man, except Monte
Cristo, had been accorded an entrance into her presence. She was sitting
on a sofa placed in an angle of the room, with her legs crossed under
her in the Eastern fashion, and seemed to have made for herself, as it
were, a kind of nest in the rich Indian silks which enveloped her. Near
her was the instrument on which she had just been playing; it was
elegantly fashioned, and worthy of its mistress. On perceiving Monte
Cristo, she arose and welcomed him with a smile peculiar to herself,
expressive at once of the most implicit obedience and also of the
deepest love. Monte Cristo advanced towards her and extended his hand,
which she as usual raised to her lips.

“Whom do you bring?” asked the young girl in Romaic, of Monte Cristo;
“is it a friend, a brother, a simple acquaintance, or an enemy.”

“A friend,” said Monte Cristo in the same language.

Monte Cristo turned to Albert. “Do you know modern Greek,” asked he.

“Then,” said Haydée, proving by her remark that she had quite understood
Monte Cristo’s question and Albert’s answer, “then I will speak either
in French or Italian, if my lord so wills it.”

Monte Cristo reflected one instant. “You will speak in Italian,” said
he.

The count made a sign to Haydée to address his visitor. “Sir,” she said
to Morcerf, “you are most welcome as the friend of my lord and master.”
This was said in excellent Tuscan, and with that soft Roman accent which
makes the language of Dante as sonorous as that of Homer. Then, turning
to Ali, she directed him to bring coffee and pipes, and when he had left
the room to execute the orders of his young mistress she beckoned Albert
to approach nearer to her. Monte Cristo and Morcerf drew their seats
towards a small table, on which were arranged music, drawings, and vases
of flowers. Ali then entered bringing coffee and chibouques; as to M.
Baptistin, this portion of the building was interdicted to him. Albert
refused the pipe which the Nubian offered him.

Ali left the room. The cups of coffee were all prepared, with the
addition of sugar, which had been brought for Albert. Monte Cristo and
Haydée took the beverage in the original Arabian manner, that is to say,
without sugar. Haydée took the porcelain cup in her little slender
fingers and conveyed it to her mouth with all the innocent artlessness
of a child when eating or drinking something which it likes. At this
moment two women entered, bringing salvers filled with ices and sherbet,
which they placed on two small tables appropriated to that purpose.

“On what subject shall I converse with her?” said Albert, in a low tone
to Monte Cristo.

“Count,” said Albert, in a low tone to Monte Cristo, “do allow the
signora to tell me something of her history. You prohibited my
mentioning my father’s name to her, but perhaps she will allude to him
of her own accord in the course of the recital, and you have no idea how
delighted I should be to hear our name pronounced by such beautiful
lips.”

Monte Cristo turned to Haydée, and with an expression of countenance
which commanded her to pay the most implicit attention to his words, he
said in Greek,—“Tell us the fate of your father; but neither the name of
the traitor nor the treason.” Haydée sighed deeply, and a shade of
sadness clouded her beautiful brow.

Haydée turned her eyes towards Monte Cristo, who, making at the same
time some imperceptible sign, murmured:

Here Haydée cast a significant glance at Monte Cristo, whose eyes had
been riveted on her countenance during the whole course of her
narrative. The young girl then continued, speaking slowly, like a person
who is either inventing or suppressing some feature of the history which
he is relating.

Monte Cristo exchanged a rapid glance with the young girl, which was
quite unperceived by Albert.

As to Haydée, these terrible reminiscences seemed to have overpowered
her for a moment, for she ceased speaking, her head leaning on her hand
like a beautiful flower bowing beneath the violence of the storm; and
her eyes gazing on vacancy indicated that she was mentally contemplating
the green summit of the Pindus and the blue waters of the lake of
Yanina, which, like a magic mirror, seemed to reflect the sombre picture
which she sketched. Monte Cristo looked at her with an indescribable
expression of interest and pity.

Haydée looked up abruptly, as if the sonorous tones of Monte Cristo’s
voice had awakened her from a dream; and she resumed her narrative.

“And do you not remember the Frenchman’s name?” said Morcerf, quite
ready to aid the memory of the narrator. Monte Cristo made a sign to him
to be silent.

Monte Cristo poured a little iced water into a glass, and presented it
to her, saying with a mildness in which was also a shade of
command,—“Courage.”

Monte Cristo arose and approached her, took her hand, and said to her in
Romaic:

“Oh, it is nothing,” said Monte Cristo. Then, patting the young girl on
the head, he continued, “Haydée is very courageous, and she sometimes
even finds consolation in the recital of her misfortunes.”

“Of whom I bought her,” said Monte Cristo, “as I told you, Albert, with
the emerald which formed a match to the one I had made into a box for
the purpose of holding my hashish pills.”

“Come, finish your cup of coffee,” said Monte Cristo; “the history is
ended.”

“You have seen M. de Monte Cristo have you not?”

At the same moment, that is, at nine o’clock in the morning, Albert de
Morcerf, dressed in a black coat buttoned up to his chin, might have
been seen walking with a quick and agitated step in the direction of
Monte Cristo’s house in the Champs-Élysées. When he presented himself at
the gate the porter informed him that the Count had gone out about half
an hour previously.

And Philip, urged by his own curiosity, entered the gallery; a second
afterwards, Monte Cristo appeared on the threshold.

“What would you have, my dear viscount?” said Monte Cristo, wiping his
hands on the towel which Ali had brought him; “I must occupy my leisure
moments in some way or other. But come, I am waiting for you.”

Both men entered Monte Cristo’s carriage, which in the course of a few
minutes deposited them safely at No. 30. Monte Cristo took Albert into
his study, and pointing to a seat, placed another for himself. “Now let
us talk the matter over quietly,” said the count.

“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “what do you see in that to annoy you?”

“My dear viscount,” said Monte Cristo gravely, “you must have seen
before today that at all times and in all places I have been at your
disposal, but the service which you have just demanded of me is one
which it is out of my power to render you.”

“But,” said Danglars thoughtfully, “how is it that your patron, M. de
Monte Cristo, did not make his proposal for you?”

“Well, Caderousse, it is Monte Cristo.”

“Yes, but they are never used. That Count of Monte Cristo is an
original, who loves to look at the sky even at night.”

The day following that on which the conversation we have related took
place, the Count of Monte Cristo set out for Auteuil, accompanied by Ali
and several attendants, and also taking with him some horses whose
qualities he was desirous of ascertaining. He was induced to undertake
this journey, of which the day before he had not even thought and which
had not occurred to Andrea either, by the arrival of Bertuccio from
Normandy with intelligence respecting the house and sloop. The house was
ready, and the sloop which had arrived a week before lay at anchor in a
small creek with her crew of six men, who had observed all the requisite
formalities and were ready again to put to sea.

“That’s well,” said Monte Cristo; “I remain here a day or two—arrange
accordingly.”

“‘M. de Monte Cristo is apprised that this night a man will enter his
house in the Champs-Élysées with the intention of carrying off some
papers supposed to be in the secretaire in the dressing-room. The
count’s well-known courage will render unnecessary the aid of the
police, whose interference might seriously affect him who sends this
advice. The count, by any opening from the bedroom, or by concealing
himself in the dressing-room, would be able to defend his property
himself. Many attendants or apparent precautions would prevent the
villain from the attempt, and M. de Monte Cristo would lose the
opportunity of discovering an enemy whom chance has revealed to him who
now sends this warning to the count,—a warning he might not be able to
send another time, if this first attempt should fail and another be
made.’”

“They do not want my papers,” said Monte Cristo, “they want to kill me;
they are no robbers, but assassins. I will not allow the prefect of
police to interfere with my private affairs. I am rich enough, forsooth,
to distribute his authority on this occasion.”

Monte Cristo leaned against a tree, and with that scrutinizing glance
which was so rarely deceived, looked up and down the avenue, examined
the passers-by, and carefully looked down the neighboring streets, to
see that no one was concealed. Ten minutes passed thus, and he was
convinced that no one was watching him. He hastened to the side-door
with Ali, entered hurriedly, and by the servants’ staircase, of which he
had the key, gained his bedroom without opening or disarranging a single
curtain, without even the porter having the slightest suspicion that the
house, which he supposed empty, contained its chief occupant.

The count and Ali ate in haste a crust of bread and drank a glass of
Spanish wine; then Monte Cristo slipped aside one of the movable panels,
which enabled him to see into the adjoining room. He had within his
reach his pistols and carbine, and Ali, standing near him, held one of
the small Arabian hatchets, whose form has not varied since the
Crusades. Through one of the windows of the bedroom, on a line with that
in the dressing-room, the count could see into the street.

Two hours passed thus. It was intensely dark; still Ali, thanks to his
wild nature, and the count, thanks doubtless to his long confinement,
could distinguish in the darkness the slightest movement of the trees.
The little light in the lodge had long been extinct. It might be
expected that the attack, if indeed an attack was projected, would be
made from the staircase of the ground floor, and not from a window; in
Monte Cristo’s opinion, the villains sought his life, not his money. It
would be his bedroom they would attack, and they must reach it by the
back staircase, or by the window in the dressing-room.

Inured as men may be to danger, forewarned as they may be of peril, they
understand, by the fluttering of the heart and the shuddering of the
frame, the enormous difference between a dream and a reality, between
the project and the execution. However, Monte Cristo only made a sign to
apprise Ali, who, understanding that danger was approaching from the
other side, drew nearer to his master. Monte Cristo was eager to
ascertain the strength and number of his enemies.

When he drew near to the bedroom door, Monte Cristo expected that he was
coming in, and raised one of his pistols; but he simply heard the sound
of the bolts sliding in their copper rings. It was only a precaution.
The nocturnal visitor, ignorant of the fact that the count had removed
the staples, might now think himself at home, and pursue his purpose
with full security. Alone and free to act as he wished, the man then
drew from his pocket something which the count could not discern, placed
it on a stand, then went straight to the secretaire, felt the lock, and
contrary to his expectation found that the key was missing. But the
glass-cutter was a prudent man who had provided for all emergencies. The
count soon heard the rattling of a bunch of skeleton keys, such as the
locksmith brings when called to force a lock, and which thieves call
nightingales, doubtless from the music of their nightly song when they
grind against the bolt.

“Ah, ha,” whispered Monte Cristo with a smile of disappointment, “he is
only a thief.”

“By heavens,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, starting back, “it is——”

“Don’t stir,” whispered Monte Cristo, “and put down your hatchet; we
shall require no arms.”

It was an order the count had just given, for immediately Ali went
noiselessly, and returned, bearing a black dress and a three-cornered
hat. Meanwhile Monte Cristo had rapidly taken off his greatcoat,
waistcoat, and shirt, and one might distinguish by the glimmering
through the open panel that he wore a pliant tunic of steel mail, of
which the last in France, where daggers are no longer dreaded, was worn
by King Louis XVI., who feared the dagger at his breast, and whose head
was cleft with a hatchet. The tunic soon disappeared under a long
cassock, as did his hair under a priest’s wig; the three-cornered hat
over this effectually transformed the count into an abbé.

The man, hearing nothing more, stood erect, and while Monte Cristo was
completing his disguise had advanced straight to the secretaire, whose
lock was beginning to crack under his nightingale.

Monte Cristo suddenly struck his finger on his forehead and a smile
passed over his lips; then drawing near to Ali, he whispered:

Ali bowed in token of strict obedience. Monte Cristo then drew a lighted
taper from a closet, and when the thief was deeply engaged with his
lock, silently opened the door, taking care that the light should shine
directly on his face. The door opened so quietly that the thief heard no
sound; but, to his astonishment, the room was suddenly illuminated. He
turned.

“Ah, good-evening, my dear M. Caderousse,” said Monte Cristo; “what are
you doing here, at such an hour?”

“Yes, undoubtedly, the Abbé Busoni himself,” replied Monte Cristo. “And
I am very glad you recognize me, dear M. Caderousse; it proves you have
a good memory, for it must be about ten years since we last met.”

“So you would rob the Count of Monte Cristo?” continued the false abbé.

“And you are breaking your promise!” interrupted Monte Cristo.

“Ah, reverend sir,” cried Caderousse, clasping his hands, and drawing
nearer to Monte Cristo, “I may indeed say you are my deliverer!”

“So much the better for the dogs,” said Monte Cristo.

“The Count of Monte Cristo, the very same in whose house we are.”

“Benedetto the count’s son?” replied Monte Cristo, astonished in his
turn.

“Is it, then, that young man whom my friend the Count of Monte Cristo
has received into his house, and who is going to marry Mademoiselle
Danglars?”

Monte Cristo returned to his bedroom, and, glancing rapidly from the
garden to the street, he saw first Caderousse, who after walking to the
end of the garden, fixed his ladder against the wall at a different part
from where he came in. The count then looking over into the street, saw
the man who appeared to be waiting run in the same direction, and place
himself against the angle of the wall where Caderousse would come over.
Caderousse climbed the ladder slowly, and looked over the coping to see
if the street was quiet. No one could be seen or heard. The clock of the
Invalides struck one. Then Caderousse sat astride the coping, and
drawing up his ladder passed it over the wall; then he began to descend,
or rather to slide down by the two stanchions, which he did with an ease
which proved how accustomed he was to the exercise. But, once started,
he could not stop. In vain did he see a man start from the shadow when
he was halfway down—in vain did he see an arm raised as he touched the
ground.

“What is the matter?” asked Monte Cristo.

He fainted. Ali and his master conveyed the wounded man into a room.
Monte Cristo motioned to Ali to undress him, and he then examined his
dreadful wounds.

“Wait a moment,” said Monte Cristo. He left the room, and returned in
five minutes with a phial. The dying man’s eyes were all the time
riveted on the door, through which he hoped succor would arrive.

“Hasten, reverend sir, hasten! I shall faint again!” Monte Cristo
approached, and dropped on his purple lips three or four drops of the
contents of the phial. Caderousse drew a deep breath. “Oh,” said he,
“that is life to me; more, more!”

“Yes, yes,” said Caderousse; and his eyes glistened at the thought of
this posthumous revenge. Monte Cristo wrote:

Monte Cristo gave the pen to Caderousse, who collected all his strength,
signed it, and fell back on his bed, saying:

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo, “and God,—I cannot say in justice, for his
justice would have slain you,—but God, in his mercy, spared your life.”

Caderousse was fast sinking. “Give me drink,” said he: “I thirst—I
burn!” Monte Cristo gave him a glass of water. “And yet that villain,
Benedetto, will escape!”

“There is a Providence; there is a God,” said Monte Cristo, “of whom you
are a striking proof, as you lie in utter despair, denying him, while I
stand before you, rich, happy, safe and entreating that God in whom you
endeavor not to believe, while in your heart you still believe in him.”

“Look well at me!” said Monte Cristo, putting the light near his face.

“Well, the abbé—the Abbé Busoni.” Monte Cristo took off the wig which
disfigured him, and let fall his black hair, which added so much to the
beauty of his pallid features.

“I am neither the Abbé Busoni nor Lord Wilmore,” said Monte Cristo;
“think again,—do you not recollect me?”

The delay demanded by Beauchamp had nearly expired. Morcerf appreciated
the advice of Monte Cristo to let things die away of their own accord.
No one had taken up the remark about the general, and no one had
recognized in the officer who betrayed the castle of Yanina the noble
count in the House of Peers.

“Since we are out,” said Beauchamp, “let us call on M. de Monte Cristo;
he is admirably adapted to revive one’s spirits, because he never
interrogates, and in my opinion those who ask no questions are the best
comforters.”

Monte Cristo uttered a joyful exclamation on seeing the young men
together. “Ah, ha!” said he, “I hope all is over, explained and
settled.”

“Let us not misunderstand each other,” replied Monte Cristo; “I
introduce no one, and certainly not M. Cavalcanti.”

“Certainly! do you come from the end of the world?” said Monte Cristo;
“you, a journalist, the husband of renown? It is the talk of all Paris.”

“Listen,” said Monte Cristo; “I have had little to do with it, for I am
at variance both with the father-in-law and the young man; there is only
Mademoiselle Eugénie, who appears but little charmed with the thoughts
of matrimony, and who, seeing how little I was disposed to persuade her
to renounce her dear liberty, retains any affection for me.”

“But,” continued Monte Cristo, “you are not in your usual spirits?”

“Well, my dear viscount,” said Monte Cristo, “I have an infallible
remedy to propose to you.”

“Beauchamp is a worthy fellow,” said Monte Cristo, when the journalist
was gone; “is he not, Albert?”

“Yes, I am aware you may go alone, since I once met you in Italy—but to
accompany the mysterious Monte Cristo?”

“Ah, yes, indeed,” said Monte Cristo with a sigh; “and do you think she
is in the least interested in me?”

“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo, sighing.

“Easily,” said Monte Cristo.

Monte Cristo smiled as he nodded to Albert, then remained a moment
absorbed in deep meditation. But passing his hand across his forehead as
if to dispel his reverie, he rang the bell twice and Bertuccio entered.

“Truly,” said Monte Cristo, “with your post-horses going at the rate of
two leagues an hour, and that absurd law that one traveller shall not
pass another without permission, so that an invalid or ill-tempered
traveller may detain those who are well and active, it is impossible to
move; I escape this annoyance by travelling with my own postilion and
horses; do I not, Ali?”

In a creek lay a little sloop, with a narrow keel and high masts,
bearing on its flag the Monte Cristo arms which were a mountain or, on a
sea azure, with a cross gules in chief which might be an allusion to his
name that recalled Calvary, the mount rendered by our Lord’s passion
more precious than gold, and to the degrading cross which his blood had
rendered holy; or it might be some personal remembrance of suffering and
regeneration buried in the night of this mysterious personage’s pas
life.

Around the schooner lay a number of small fishing-boats belonging to the
fishermen of the neighboring village, like humble subjects awaiting
orders from their queen. There, as in every spot where Monte Cristo
stopped, if but for two days, luxury abounded and life went on with the
utmost ease.

Albert found in his anteroom two guns, with all the accoutrements for
hunting; a lofty room on the ground floor containing all the ingenious
instruments the English—eminent in piscatory pursuits, since they are
patient and sluggish—have invented for fishing. The day passed in
pursuing those exercises in which Monte Cristo excelled. They killed a
dozen pheasants in the park, as many trout in the stream, dined in a
summer-house overlooking the ocean, and took tea in the library.

Towards the evening of the third day. Albert, completely exhausted with
the exercise which invigorated Monte Cristo, was sleeping in an armchair
near the window, while the count was designing with his architect the
plan of a conservatory in his house, when the sound of a horse at full
speed on the high road made Albert look up. He was disagreeably
surprised to see his own valet de chambre, whom he had not brought, that
he might not inconvenience Monte Cristo.

“Florentin here!” cried he, starting up; “is my mother ill?” And he
hastened to the door. Monte Cristo watched and saw him approach the
valet, who drew a small sealed parcel from his pocket, containing a
newspaper and a letter.

“Poor young man,” said Monte Cristo in a low voice; “it is then true
that the sin of the father shall fall on the children to the third and
fourth generation.”

He went back to the room where he had left Monte Cristo. Five minutes
had sufficed to make a complete transformation in his appearance. His
voice had become rough and hoarse; his face was furrowed with wrinkles;
his eyes burned under the blue-veined lids, and he tottered like a
drunken man.

Albert reeled as if he had been shot, and fell on a chair near the door.
Monte Cristo did not see this second manifestation of physical
exhaustion; he was at the window, calling:

“‘I, El-Kobbir, a slave-merchant, and purveyor of the harem of his
highness, acknowledge having received for transmission to the sublime
emperor, from the French lord, the Count of Monte Cristo, an emerald
valued at eight hundred thousand francs; as the ransom of a young
Christian slave of eleven years of age, named Haydée, the acknowledged
daughter of the late lord Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina, and of
Vasiliki, his favorite; she having been sold to me seven years
previously, with her mother, who had died on arriving at Constantinople,
by a French colonel in the service of the Vizier Ali Tepelini, named
Fernand Mondego. The above-mentioned purchase was made on his highness’s
account, whose mandate I had, for the sum of four hundred thousand
francs.

“Near the merchant’s signature there was, indeed, the seal of the
sublime emperor. A dreadful silence followed the reading of this
document; the count could only stare, and his gaze, fixed as if
unconsciously on Haydée, seemed one of fire and blood. ‘Madame,’ said
the president, ‘may reference be made to the Count of Monte Cristo, who
is now, I believe, in Paris?’

“‘Sir,’ replied Haydée, ‘the Count of Monte Cristo, my foster-father,
has been in Normandy the last three days.’

“‘Who, then, has counselled you to take this step, one for which the
court is deeply indebted to you, and which is perfectly natural,
considering your birth and your misfortunes?’—‘Sir,’ replied Haydée, ‘I
have been led to take this step from a feeling of respect and grief.
Although a Christian, may God forgive me, I have always sought to
revenge my illustrious father. Since I set my foot in France, and knew
the traitor lived in Paris, I have watched carefully. I live retired in
the house of my noble protector, but I do it from choice. I love
retirement and silence, because I can live with my thoughts and
recollections of past days. But the Count of Monte Cristo surrounds me
with every paternal care, and I am ignorant of nothing which passes in
the world. I learn all in the silence of my apartments,—for instance, I
see all the newspapers, every periodical, as well as every new piece of
music; and by thus watching the course of the life of others, I learned
what had transpired this morning in the House of Peers, and what was to
take place this evening; then I wrote.’

“‘Then,’ remarked the president, ‘the Count of Monte Cristo knows
nothing of your present proceedings?’—‘He is quite unaware of them, and
I have but one fear, which is that he should disapprove of what I have
done. But it is a glorious day for me,’ continued the young girl,
raising her ardent gaze to heaven, ‘that on which I find at last an
opportunity of avenging my father!’

“No other than your friend, Monte Cristo.”

“The Count of Monte Cristo told you to write to Yanina?”

“Yes, I had told him that long since, and I did only what any other
would have done in my circumstances, and perhaps less. When, the day
after the arrival of this answer, your father came by the advice of
Monte Cristo to ask my daughter’s hand for you, I decidedly refused him,
but without any explanation or exposure. In short, why should I have any
more to do with the affair? How did the honor or disgrace of M. de
Morcerf affect me? It neither increased nor decreased my income.”

Albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was no doubt upon the
subject. Danglars defended himself with the baseness, but at the same
time with the assurance, of a man who speaks the truth, at least in
part, if not wholly—not for conscience’ sake, but through fear. Besides,
what was Morcerf seeking? It was not whether Danglars or Monte Cristo
was more or less guilty; it was a man who would answer for the offence,
whether trifling or serious; it was a man who would fight, and it was
evident Danglars would not fight.

In addition to this, everything forgotten or unperceived before
presented itself now to his recollection. Monte Cristo knew everything,
as he had bought the daughter of Ali Pasha; and, knowing everything, he
had advised Danglars to write to Yanina. The answer known, he had
yielded to Albert’s wish to be introduced to Haydée, and allowed the
conversation to turn on the death of Ali, and had not opposed Haydée’s
recital (but having, doubtless, warned the young girl, in the few Romaic
words he spoke to her, not to implicate Morcerf’s father). Besides, had
he not begged of Morcerf not to mention his father’s name before Haydée?
Lastly, he had taken Albert to Normandy when he knew the final blow was
near. There could be no doubt that all had been calculated and
previously arranged; Monte Cristo then was in league with his father’s
enemies. Albert took Beauchamp aside, and communicated these ideas to
him.

“You are right,” said the latter; “M. Danglars has only been a secondary
agent in this sad affair, and it is of M. de Monte Cristo that you must
demand an explanation.”

“Sir,” said he to Danglars, “understand that I do not take a final leave
of you; I must ascertain if your insinuations are just, and am going now
to inquire of the Count of Monte Cristo.”

“Listen,” said he; “just now I told you it was of M. de Monte Cristo you
must demand an explanation.”

“Because, for instance, you noticed on the evening of the ball we gave,
that M. de Monte Cristo would eat nothing in our house.”

“M. de Monte Cristo!” she exclaimed; “and how is he connected with the
question you asked me?”

“You know, mother, M. de Monte Cristo is almost an Oriental, and it is
customary with the Orientals to secure full liberty for revenge by not
eating or drinking in the houses of their enemies.”

“Do you say M. de Monte Cristo is our enemy?” replied Mercédès, becoming
paler than the sheet which covered her. “Who told you so? Why, you are
mad, Albert! M. de Monte Cristo has only shown us kindness. M. de Monte
Cristo saved your life; you yourself presented him to us. Oh, I entreat
you, my son, if you had entertained such an idea, dispel it; and my
counsel to you—nay, my prayer—is to retain his friendship.”

Albert wandered about the theatre until the curtain was drawn up. He
hoped to meet with M. de Monte Cristo either in the lobby or on the
stairs. The bell summoned him to his seat, and he entered the orchestra
with Château-Renaud and Beauchamp. But his eyes scarcely quitted the box
between the columns, which remained obstinately closed during the whole
of the first act. At last, as Albert was looking at his watch for about
the hundredth time, at the beginning of the second act the door opened,
and Monte Cristo entered, dressed in black, and, leaning over the front
of the box, looked around the pit. Morrel followed him, and looked also
for his sister and brother in-law; he soon discovered them in another
box, and kissed his hand to them.

The door opened, and Monte Cristo, turning round, saw Albert, pale and
trembling, followed by Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.

“Where are you come from, sir? “ said Monte Cristo “You do not appear to
be in the possession of your senses.”

“I do not understand you, sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “and if I did,
your tone is too high. I am at home here, and I alone have a right to
raise my voice above another’s. Leave the box, sir!”

Monte Cristo pointed towards the door with the most commanding dignity.

“Ah, I shall know how to make you leave your home!” replied Albert,
clasping in his convulsed grasp the glove, which Monte Cristo did not
lose sight of.

“Well, well,” said Monte Cristo quietly, “I see you wish to quarrel with
me; but I would give you one piece of advice, which you will do well to
keep in mind. It is in poor taste to make a display of a challenge.
Display is not becoming to everyone, M. de Morcerf.”

At this name a murmur of astonishment passed around the group of
spectators of this scene. They had talked of no one but Morcerf the
whole day. Albert understood the allusion in a moment, and was about to
throw his glove at the count, when Morrel seized his hand, while
Beauchamp and Château-Renaud, fearing the scene would surpass the limits
of a challenge, held him back. But Monte Cristo, without rising, and
leaning forward in his chair, merely stretched out his arm and, taking
the damp, crushed glove from the clenched hand of the young man:

Wild, almost unconscious, and with eyes inflamed, Albert stepped back,
and Morrel closed the door. Monte Cristo took up his glass again as if
nothing had happened; his face was like marble, and his heart was like
bronze. Morrel whispered, “What have you done to him?”

“I? Nothing—at least personally,” said Monte Cristo.

“Probably,” said Monte Cristo with his imperturbable tranquillity.

“What shall I do with Albert? As certainly, Maximilian, as I now press
your hand, I shall kill him before ten o’clock tomorrow morning.”
Morrel, in his turn, took Monte Cristo’s hand in both of his, and he
shuddered to feel how cold and steady it was.

“Do not speak to me of that,” said Monte Cristo, with the first movement
of anger he had betrayed; “I will make him suffer.”

Morrel, amazed, let fall Monte Cristo’s hand. “Count, count!” said he.

“Come in,” said Monte Cristo with a voice that betrayed not the least
emotion; and immediately Beauchamp appeared. “Good-evening, M.
Beauchamp,” said Monte Cristo, as if this was the first time he had seen
the journalist that evening; “be seated.”

“And that means,” replied Monte Cristo, laughing, “that you had,
probably, just dined together. I am happy to see, M. Beauchamp, that you
are more sober than he was.”

Monte Cristo motioned him to be silent. “Come,” said he, laughing,
“there are all my hopes about to be destroyed.”

“M. Beauchamp,” interposed this strange man, “the Count of Monte Cristo
bows to none but the Count of Monte Cristo himself. Say no more, I
entreat you. I do what I please, M. Beauchamp, and it is always well
done.”

“I am, sir, a living guaranty,” replied Monte Cristo, motionless, but
with a threatening look; “we have both blood in our veins which we wish
to shed—that is our mutual guaranty. Tell the viscount so, and that
tomorrow, before ten o’clock, I shall see what color his is.”

“It is quite immaterial to me,” said Monte Cristo, “and it was very
unnecessary to disturb me at the Opera for such a trifle. In France
people fight with the sword or pistol, in the colonies with the carbine,
in Arabia with the dagger. Tell your client that, although I am the
insulted party, in order to carry out my eccentricity, I leave him the
choice of arms, and will accept without discussion, without dispute,
anything, even combat by drawing lots, which is always stupid, but with
me different from other people, as I am sure to gain.”

“Certainly,” said Monte Cristo, slightly shrugging his shoulders;
“otherwise I would not fight with M. de Morcerf. I shall kill him—I
cannot help it. Only by a single line this evening at my house let me
know the arms and the hour; I do not like to be kept waiting.”

“Very well, sir,” said Monte Cristo. “Now all that is settled, do let me
see the performance, and tell your friend Albert not to come any more
this evening; he will hurt himself with all his ill-chosen barbarisms:
let him go home and go to sleep.”

“Now,” said Monte Cristo, turning towards Morrel, “I may depend upon
you, may I not?”

Monte Cristo waited, according to his usual custom, until Duprez had
sung his famous “Suivez-moi!” then he rose and went out. Morrel took
leave of him at the door, renewing his promise to be with him the next
morning at seven o’clock, and to bring Emmanuel. Then he stepped into
his coupé, calm and smiling, and was at home in five minutes. No one who
knew the count could mistake his expression when, on entering, he said:

Ali brought the box to his master, who examined the weapons with a
solicitude very natural to a man who is about to intrust his life to a
little powder and shot. These were pistols of an especial pattern, which
Monte Cristo had had made for target practice in his own room. A cap was
sufficient to drive out the bullet, and from the adjoining room no one
would have suspected that the count was, as sportsmen would say, keeping
his hand in.

“Mercédès is dead, madame,” said Monte Cristo; “I know no one now of
that name.”

“Fernand, do you mean?” replied Monte Cristo, with bitter irony; “since
we are recalling names, let us remember them all.” Monte Cristo had
pronounced the name of Fernand with such an expression of hatred that
Mercédès felt a thrill of horror run through every vein.

“If you have seen all, madame, you know that the son of Fernand has
publicly insulted me,” said Monte Cristo with awful calmness.

“Ah, madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “all this is an affair between the
French captain and the daughter of Vasiliki. It does not concern me, you
are right; and if I have sworn to revenge myself, it is not on the
French captain, or the Count of Morcerf, but on the fisherman Fernand,
the husband of Mercédès the Catalane.”

“But,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “why was I absent? And why were you
alone?”

Monte Cristo went to a secretaire, opened a drawer by a spring, from
which he took a paper which had lost its original color, and the ink of
which had become of a rusty hue—this he placed in the hands of Mercédès.
It was Danglars’ letter to the king’s attorney, which the Count of Monte
Cristo, disguised as a clerk from the house of Thomson & French, had
taken from the file against Edmond Dantès, on the day he had paid the
two hundred thousand francs to M. de Boville. Mercédès read with terror
the following lines:

The dignity of the wife checked the fervor of the lover and the mother.
Her forehead almost touched the carpet, when the count sprang forward
and raised her. Then seated on a chair, she looked at the manly
countenance of Monte Cristo, on which grief and hatred still impressed a
threatening expression.

“Mercédès!” repeated Monte Cristo; “Mercédès! Well yes, you are right;
that name has still its charms, and this is the first time for a long
period that I have pronounced it so distinctly. Oh, Mercédès, I have
uttered your name with the sigh of melancholy, with the groan of sorrow,
with the last effort of despair; I have uttered it when frozen with
cold, crouched on the straw in my dungeon; I have uttered it, consumed
with heat, rolling on the stone floor of my prison. Mercédès, I must
revenge myself, for I suffered fourteen years,—fourteen years I wept, I
cursed; now I tell you, Mercédès, I must revenge myself.”

“It is written in the good book,” said Monte Cristo, “that the sins of
the fathers shall fall upon their children to the third and fourth
generation. Since God himself dictated those words to his prophet, why
should I seek to make myself better than God?”

“Have you known what it is to have your father starve to death in your
absence?” cried Monte Cristo, thrusting his hands into his hair; “have
you seen the woman you loved giving her hand to your rival, while you
were perishing at the bottom of a dungeon?”

Mercédès uttered these words with such deep anguish, with an accent of
such intense despair, that Monte Cristo could not restrain a sob. The
lion was daunted; the avenger was conquered.

Mercédès uttered a cry which made the tears start from Monte Cristo’s
eyes; but these tears disappeared almost instantaneously, for,
doubtless, God had sent some angel to collect them—far more precious
were they in his eyes than the richest pearls of Guzerat and Ophir.

“So much the better,” replied Monte Cristo; “as that poor Edmond will
not have long to be loved by you. Death is about to return to the tomb,
the phantom to retire in darkness.”

“It will take place,” said Monte Cristo, in a most solemn tone; “but
instead of your son’s blood to stain the ground, mine will flow.”

Mercédès shrieked, and sprang towards Monte Cristo, but, suddenly
stopping, “Edmond,” said she, “there is a God above us, since you live
and since I have seen you again; I trust to him from my heart. While
waiting his assistance I trust to your word; you have said that my son
should live, have you not?”

“Yes, madame, he shall live,” said Monte Cristo, surprised that without
more emotion Mercédès had accepted the heroic sacrifice he made for her.
Mercédès extended her hand to the count.

Mercédès looked at the count in a way which expressed at the same time
her astonishment, her admiration, and her gratitude. Monte Cristo
pressed his forehead on his burning hands, as if his brain could no
longer bear alone the weight of its thoughts.

The clock of the Invalides struck one when the carriage which conveyed
Madame de Morcerf rolled away on the pavement of the Champs-Élysées, and
made Monte Cristo raise his head.

After Mercédès had left Monte Cristo, he fell into profound gloom.
Around him and within him the flight of thought seemed to have stopped;
his energetic mind slumbered, as the body does after extreme fatigue.

He arose, and quietly opening the door of the drawing-room, saw Haydée,
who had fallen on a chair, with her arms hanging down and her beautiful
head thrown back. She had been standing at the door, to prevent his
going out without seeing her, until sleep, which the young cannot
resist, had overpowered her frame, wearied as she was with watching. The
noise of the door did not awaken her, and Monte Cristo gazed at her with
affectionate regret.

“I bequeath to Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis,—and son of my
former patron, Pierre Morrel, shipowner at Marseilles,—the sum of twenty
millions, a part of which may be offered to his sister Julie and
brother-in-law Emmanuel, if he does not fear this increase of fortune
may mar their happiness. These twenty millions are concealed in my
grotto at Monte Cristo, of which Bertuccio knows the secret. If his
heart is free, and he will marry Haydée, the daughter of Ali Pasha of
Yanina, whom I have brought up with the love of a father, and who has
shown the love and tenderness of a daughter for me, he will thus
accomplish my last wish. This will has already constituted Haydée
heiress of the rest of my fortune, consisting of lands, funds in
England, Austria, and Holland, furniture in my different palaces and
houses, and which without the twenty millions and the legacies to my
servants, may still amount to sixty millions.”

“I am going on a journey, dear child,” said Monte Cristo, with an
expression of infinite tenderness and melancholy; “and if any misfortune
should happen to me——”

“Well, if any misfortune happen to me,” replied Monte Cristo, “I wish my
daughter to be happy.” Haydée smiled sorrowfully, and shook her head.

Then he carried Haydée to her room, resigned her to the care of her
attendants, and returning to his study, which he shut quickly this time,
he again copied the destroyed will. As he was finishing, the sound of a
cabriolet entering the yard was heard. Monte Cristo approached the
window, and saw Maximilian and Emmanuel alight. “Good,” said he; “it was
time,”—and he sealed his will with three seals.

Monte Cristo could not resist this proof of affection; he not only
extended his hand to the young man, but flew to him with open arms.

“Have you succeeded?” asked Monte Cristo quickly, with an imperceptible
gleam of hope.

“Well, we have time; look.” Monte Cristo took the pistols he held in his
hand when Mercédès entered, and fixing an ace of clubs against the iron
plate, with four shots he successively shot off the four sides of the
club. At each shot Morrel turned pale. He examined the bullets with
which Monte Cristo performed this dexterous feat, and saw that they were
no larger than buckshot.

“It is astonishing,” said he. “Look, Emmanuel.” Then turning towards
Monte Cristo, “Count,” said he, “in the name of all that is dear to you,
I entreat you not to kill Albert!—the unhappy youth has a mother.”

“You are right,” said Monte Cristo; “and I have none.” These words were
uttered in a tone which made Morrel shudder.

“I suffer from emotion?” said Monte Cristo.

Maximilian and Emmanuel looked at each other. Monte Cristo drew out his
watch. “Let us go,” said he; “it is five minutes past seven, and the
appointment was for eight o’clock.”

A carriage was in readiness at the door. Monte Cristo stepped into it
with his two friends. He had stopped a moment in the passage to listen
at a door, and Maximilian and Emmanuel, who had considerately passed
forward a few steps, thought they heard him answer by a sigh to a sob
from within. As the clock struck eight they drove up to the place of
meeting.

Monte Cristo sprang lightly from the carriage, and offered his hand to
assist Emmanuel and Maximilian. The latter retained the count’s hand
between his.

Monte Cristo drew Morrel a step or two behind his brother-in-law.

“Maximilian,” said he, “are your affections disengaged?” Morrel looked
at Monte Cristo with astonishment. “I do not seek your confidence, my
dear friend. I only ask you a simple question; answer it;—that is all I
require.”

“You are doubtless provided with pistols, gentlemen? M. de Monte Cristo
yields his right of using his.”

“Stop, gentlemen,” said Albert; “I have two words to say to the Count of
Monte Cristo.”

“What does he want with me?” said Monte Cristo.

“Ah?” said Monte Cristo, “I trust he is not going to tempt me by some
fresh insult!”

Had a thunderbolt fallen in the midst of the spectators of this
unexpected scene, it would not have surprised them more than did
Albert’s declaration. As for Monte Cristo, his eyes slowly rose towards
heaven with an expression of infinite gratitude. He could not understand
how Albert’s fiery nature, of which he had seen so much among the Roman
bandits, had suddenly stooped to this humiliation. He recognized the
influence of Mercédès, and saw why her noble heart had not opposed the
sacrifice she knew beforehand would be useless.

Monte Cristo, with moistened eye, heaving breast, and lips half open,
extended to Albert a hand which the latter pressed with a sentiment
resembling respectful fear.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “M. de Monte Cristo receives my apology. I had
acted hastily towards him. Hasty actions are generally bad ones. Now my
fault is repaired. I hope the world will not call me cowardly for acting
as my conscience dictated. But if anyone should entertain a false
opinion of me,” added he, drawing himself up as if he would challenge
both friends and enemies, “I shall endeavor to correct his mistake.”

“The Count of Monte Cristo acts dishonorably to M. de Morcerf, and is
justified by his son! Had I ten Yaninas in my family, I should only
consider myself the more bound to fight ten times.”

As for Monte Cristo, his headcwas bent down, his arms were powerless.
Bowing under the weight of twenty-four years’ reminiscences, he thought
not of Albert, of Beauchamp, of Château-Renaud, or of any of that group;
but he thought of that courageous woman who had come to plead for her
son’s life, to whom he had offered his, and who had now saved it by the
revelation of a dreadful family secret, capable of destroying forever in
that young man’s heart every feeling of filial piety.

The Count of Monte Cristo bowed to the five young men with a melancholy
and dignified smile, and got into his carriage with Maximilian and
Emmanuel. Albert, Beauchamp, and Château-Renaud remained alone. Albert
looked at his two friends, not timidly, but in a way that appeared to
ask their opinion of what he had just done.

“Gentlemen,” interrupted Albert, “I think you did not understand that
something very serious had passed between M. de Monte Cristo and
myself.”

“You will say I apologized to the Count of Monte Cristo. Go.”

Meanwhile Monte Cristo had also returned to town with Emmanuel and
Maximilian. Their return was cheerful. Emmanuel did not conceal his joy
at the peaceful termination of the affair, and was loud in his
expressions of delight. Morrel, in a corner of the carriage, allowed his
brother-in-law’s gayety to expend itself in words, while he felt equal
inward joy, which, however, betrayed itself only in his countenance.

At the Barrière du Trône they met Bertuccio, who was waiting there,
motionless as a sentinel at his post. Monte Cristo put his head out of
the window, exchanged a few words with him in a low tone, and the
steward disappeared.

“Stop a moment,” said Monte Cristo; “do not let me lose both my
companions. Return, Emmanuel, to your charming wife, and present my best
compliments to her; and do you, Morrel, accompany me to the Champs-
Élysées.”

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo; “for that reason I wished to keep you near
me.”

“What?” said Monte Cristo.

“Very brave,” said Monte Cristo; “I have seen him sleep with a sword
suspended over his head.”

“All owing to your influence,” replied Monte Cristo, smiling.

They had arrived in the Champs-Élysées. Monte Cristo opened the
carriage-door, Morrel sprang out on the pavement, Bertuccio was waiting
on the steps. Morrel disappeared down the Avenue de Marigny, and Monte
Cristo hastened to join Bertuccio.

“Come this way.” Monte Cristo took Bertuccio into his study, wrote the
letter we have seen, and gave it to the steward. “Go,” said he quickly.
“But first, let Haydée be informed that I have returned.”

“Here I am,” said the young girl, who at the sound of the carriage had
run downstairs and whose face was radiant with joy at seeing the count
return safely. Bertuccio left. Every transport of a daughter finding a
father, all the delight of a mistress seeing an adored lover, were felt
by Haydée during the first moments of this meeting, which she had so
eagerly expected. Doubtless, although less evident, Monte Cristo’s joy
was not less intense. Joy to hearts which have suffered long is like the
dew on the ground after a long drought; both the heart and the ground
absorb that beneficent moisture falling on them, and nothing is
outwardly apparent.

Monte Cristo was beginning to think, what he had not for a long time
dared to believe, that there were two Mercédès in the world, and he
might yet be happy. His eye, elate with happiness, was reading eagerly
the tearful gaze of Haydée, when suddenly the door opened. The count
knit his brow.

“I know not if it is finished, my beloved child,” said Monte Cristo,
taking the young girl’s hands; “but I do know you have nothing more to
fear.”

“That man cannot injure me, Haydée,” said Monte Cristo; “it was his son
alone that there was cause to fear.”

Monte Cristo smiled. “By my father’s tomb,” said he, extending his hand
over the head of the young girl, “I swear to you, Haydée, that if any
misfortune happens, it will not be to me.”

“I believe you, my lord, as implicitly as if God had spoken to me,” said
the young girl, presenting her forehead to him. Monte Cristo pressed on
that pure beautiful forehead a kiss which made two hearts throb at once,
the one violently, the other secretly.

We must explain this visit, which although expected by Monte Cristo, is
unexpected to our readers. While Mercédès, as we have said, was making a
similar inventory of her property to Albert’s, while she was arranging
her jewels, shutting her drawers, collecting her keys, to leave
everything in perfect order, she did not perceive a pale and sinister
face at a glass door which threw light into the passage, from which
everything could be both seen and heard. He who was thus looking,
without being heard or seen, probably heard and saw all that passed in
Madame de Morcerf’s apartments. From that glass door the pale-faced man
went to the count’s bedroom and raised with a constricted hand the
curtain of a window overlooking the courtyard. He remained there ten
minutes, motionless and dumb, listening to the beating of his own heart.
For him those ten minutes were very long. It was then Albert, returning
from his meeting with the count, perceived his father watching for his
arrival behind a curtain, and turned aside. The count’s eye expanded; he
knew Albert had insulted the count dreadfully, and that in every country
in the world such an insult would lead to a deadly duel. Albert returned
safely—then the count was revenged.

“To the Champs-Élysées,” said the general; “the Count of Monte Cristo’s.
Hurry!”

A moment afterwards, Baptistin announced the Count of Morcerf to Monte
Cristo, and the latter, leading Haydée aside, ordered that Morcerf be
asked into the drawing-room. The general was pacing the room the third
time when, in turning, he perceived Monte Cristo at the door.

“Ah, it is M. de Morcerf,” said Monte Cristo quietly; “I thought I had
not heard aright.”

“It is true, sir,” said Monte Cristo with his dreadful calmness; “a
secondary cause, but not the principal.”

“M. Albert de Morcerf is no coward!” said Monte Cristo.

“Sir,” replied Monte Cristo coldly, “I did not expect that you had come
here to relate to me your little family affairs. Go and tell M. Albert
that, and he may know what to answer you.”

“Until one of us dies,” repeated Monte Cristo, moving his head slightly
up and down.

“Very true,” said Monte Cristo; “it is unnecessary, we know each other
so well!”

“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo, with the same indomitable coolness; “let us
see. Are you not the soldier Fernand who deserted on the eve of the
battle of Waterloo? Are you not the Lieutenant Fernand who served as
guide and spy to the French army in Spain? Are you not the Captain
Fernand who betrayed, sold, and murdered his benefactor, Ali? And have
not all these Fernands, united, made Lieutenant-General, the Count of
Morcerf, peer of France?”

“Oh,” cried the general, as if branded with a hot iron, “wretch,—to
reproach me with my shame when about, perhaps, to kill me! No, I did not
say I was a stranger to you. I know well, demon, that you have
penetrated into the darkness of the past, and that you have read, by the
light of what torch I know not, every page of my life; but perhaps I may
be more honorable in my shame than you under your pompous coverings.
No—no, I am aware you know me; but I know you only as an adventurer sewn
up in gold and jewellery. You call yourself, in Paris, the Count of
Monte Cristo; in Italy, Sinbad the Sailor; in Malta, I forget what. But
it is your real name I want to know, in the midst of your hundred names,
that I may pronounce it when we meet to fight, at the moment when I
plunge my sword through your heart.”

The Count of Monte Cristo turned dreadfully pale; his eye seemed to burn
with a devouring fire. He leaped towards a dressing-room near his
bedroom, and in less than a moment, tearing off his cravat, his coat and
waistcoat, he put on a sailor’s jacket and hat, from beneath which
rolled his long black hair. He returned thus, formidable and implacable,
advancing with his arms crossed on his breast, towards the general, who
could not understand why he had disappeared, but who on seeing him
again, and feeling his teeth chatter and his legs sink under him, drew
back, and only stopped when he found a table to support his clenched
hand.

We may easily conceive where Morrel’s appointment was. On leaving Monte
Cristo he walked slowly towards Villefort’s; we say slowly, for Morrel
had more than half an hour to spare to go five hundred steps, but he had
hastened to take leave of Monte Cristo because he wished to be alone
with his thoughts. He knew his time well—the hour when Valentine was
giving Noirtier his breakfast, and was sure not to be disturbed in the
performance of this pious duty. Noirtier and Valentine had given him
leave to go twice a week, and he was now availing himself of that
permission.

“Excuse me,” said the implacable young girl, “Monsieur Albert claims and
well deserves his share. It appears that after having challenged M. de
Monte Cristo at the Opera yesterday, he apologized on the ground today.”

He flew from the apartment, and Morrel at the same moment darted out at
the other door. He had been struck to the heart by a frightful
recollection—the conversation he had heard between the doctor and
Villefort the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death, recurred to him;
these symptoms, to a less alarming extent, were the same which had
preceded the death of Barrois. At the same time Monte Cristo’s voice
seemed to resound in his ear with the words he had heard only two hours
before, “Whatever you want, Morrel, come to me; I have great power.”

The same cabriolet which had brought Villefort took them back at full
speed, and at this moment Morrel rapped at Monte Cristo’s door.

“Are you then come from M. de Morcerf’s?” asked Monte Cristo.

“The general has just blown his brains out,” replied Monte Cristo with
great coolness.

“Not for the countess, or for Albert,” said Monte Cristo; “a dead father
or husband is better than a dishonored one,—blood washes out shame.”

“Tell me what it is,” replied Monte Cristo.

“Do you think I love you?” said Monte Cristo, taking the young man’s
hand affectionately in his.

“Well, have you sent?” asked Monte Cristo, seeing Morrel return.

“You know I am waiting,” said Monte Cristo, smiling.

“Ah, indeed?” said Monte Cristo, looking earnestly at the young man, and
by an imperceptible movement turning his chair, so that he remained in
the shade while the light fell full on Maximilian’s face.

“And what did the doctor answer?” asked Monte Cristo.

“Indeed!” said Monte Cristo with a slight cough which in moments of
extreme emotion helped him to disguise a blush, or his pallor, or the
intense interest with which he listened; “indeed, Maximilian, did you
hear that?”

Monte Cristo listened, or appeared to do so, with the greatest calmness.

“My dear friend,” said Monte Cristo, “you appear to be relating an
adventure which we all know by heart. I know the house where you heard
it, or one very similar to it; a house with a garden, a master, a
physician, and where there have been three unexpected and sudden deaths.
Well, I have not intercepted your confidence, and yet I know all that as
well as you, and I have no conscientious scruples. No, it does not
concern me. You say an exterminating angel appears to have devoted that
house to God’s anger—well, who says your supposition is not reality? Do
not notice things which those whose interest it is to see them pass
over. If it is God’s justice, instead of his anger, which is walking
through that house, Maximilian, turn away your face and let his justice
accomplish its purpose.”

“Well, what do you wish me to do? Do you wish me, for instance, to give
information to the procureur?” Monte Cristo uttered the last words with
so much meaning that Morrel, starting up, cried out:

Deep grief was depicted on Morrel’s features; he seized Monte Cristo’s
hand. “But it is beginning again, I say!”

“And what is it to me?” replied Monte Cristo, shrugging his shoulders;
“do I know those people? and must I lose the one to save the other?
Faith, no, for between the culprit and the victim I have no choice.”

“You love?—whom?” cried Monte Cristo, starting to his feet, and seizing
the two hands which Morrel was raising towards heaven.

Monte Cristo uttered a cry which those only can conceive who have heard
the roar of a wounded lion. “Unhappy man,” cried he, wringing his hands
in his turn; “you love Valentine,—that daughter of an accursed race!”

As for Monte Cristo, after this ebullition he closed his eyes as if
dazzled by internal light. In a moment he restrained himself so
powerfully that the tempestuous heaving of his breast subsided, as
turbulent and foaming waves yield to the sun’s genial influence when the
cloud has passed. This silence, self-control, and struggle lasted about
twenty seconds, then the count raised his pallid face.

“I tell you to hope. Do you understand me?” cried Monte Cristo.
“Remember that I never uttered a falsehood and am never deceived. It is
twelve o’clock, Maximilian; thank heaven that you came at noon rather
than in the evening, or tomorrow morning. Listen, Morrel—it is noon; if
Valentine is not now dead, she will not die.”

Monte Cristo pressed his hands to his forehead. What was passing in that
brain, so loaded with dreadful secrets? What does the angel of light or
the angel of darkness say to that mind, at once implacable and generous?
God only knows.

Monte Cristo raised his head once more, and this time he was calm as a
child awaking from its sleep.

“Oh, count, you overwhelm me with that coolness. Have you, then, power
against death? Are you superhuman? Are you an angel?” And the young man,
who had never shrunk from danger, shrank before Monte Cristo with
indescribable terror. But Monte Cristo looked at him with so melancholy
and sweet a smile, that Maximilian felt the tears filling his eyes.

Morrel, subdued by the extraordinary ascendancy Monte Cristo exercised
over everything around him, did not endeavor to resist it. He pressed
the count’s hand and left. He stopped one moment at the door for
Baptistin, whom he saw in the Rue Matignon, and who was running.

“It is just as I tell you, I assure you, and you must not be angry with
me, for you have sought this disclosure. I do not willingly enter into
arithmetical explanations with an artist like you, who fears to enter my
study lest she should imbibe disagreeable or anti-poetic impressions and
sensations. But in that same banker’s study, where you very willingly
presented yourself yesterday to ask for the thousand francs I give you
monthly for pocket-money, you must know, my dear young lady, that many
things may be learned, useful even to a girl who will not marry. There
one may learn, for instance, what, out of regard to your nervous
susceptibility, I will inform you of in the drawing-room, namely, that
the credit of a banker is his physical and moral life; that credit
sustains him as breath animates the body; and M. de Monte Cristo once
gave me a lecture on that subject, which I have never forgotten. There
we may learn that as credit sinks, the body becomes a corpse, and this
is what must happen very soon to the banker who is proud to own so good
a logician as you for his daughter.”

Three days after the scene we have just described, namely towards five
o’clock in the afternoon of the day fixed for the signature of the
contract between Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars and Andrea Cavalcanti,
whom the banker persisted in calling prince, a fresh breeze was stirring
the leaves in the little garden in front of the Count of Monte Cristo’s
house, and the count was preparing to go out. While his horses were
impatiently pawing the ground, held in by the coachman, who had been
seated a quarter of an hour on his box, the elegant phaeton with which
we are familiar rapidly turned the angle of the entrance-gate, and cast
out on the doorsteps M. Andrea Cavalcanti, as decked up and gay as if he
were going to marry a princess.

“Ah, indeed?” said Monte Cristo.

“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “you are fortunate, M. Cavalcanti; it is a
most suitable alliance you are contracting, and Mademoiselle Danglars is
a handsome girl.”

“Without reckoning,” added Monte Cristo, “that he is on the eve of
entering into a sort of speculation already in vogue in the United
States and in England, but quite novel in France.”

“Without reckoning,” replied Monte Cristo, “that all his fortune will
come to you, and justly too, since Mademoiselle Danglars is an only
daughter. Besides, your own fortune, as your father assured me, is
almost equal to that of your betrothed. But enough of money matters. Do
you know, M. Andrea, I think you have managed this affair rather
skilfully?”

“By me? Not at all, prince,” said Monte Cristo laying a marked stress on
the title, “what have I done for you? Are not your name, your social
position, and your merit sufficient?”

“You are completely mistaken, sir,” said Monte Cristo coldly, who felt
the perfidious manœuvre of the young man, and understood the bearing of
his words; “you only acquired my protection after the influence and
fortune of your father had been ascertained; for, after all, who
procured for me, who had never seen either you or your illustrious
father, the pleasure of your acquaintance?—two of my good friends, Lord
Wilmore and the Abbé Busoni. What encouraged me not to become your
surety, but to patronize you?—your father’s name, so well known in Italy
and so highly honored. Personally, I do not know you.”

“It appears so, sir,” replied Monte Cristo.

“Proceed,” said Monte Cristo.

“Ah, my dear sir! What?—after the varied relations I have had the
happiness to sustain towards you, can it be that you know me so little
as to ask such a thing? Ask me to lend you half a million and, although
such a loan is somewhat rare, on my honor, you would annoy me less!
Know, then, what I thought I had already told you, that in participation
in this world’s affairs, more especially in their moral aspects, the
Count of Monte Cristo has never ceased to entertain the scruples and
even the superstitions of the East. I, who have a seraglio at Cairo, one
at Smyrna, and one at Constantinople, preside at a wedding?—never!”

“Well,” replied Monte Cristo, “it will be the way, everybody says, of
trebling your fortune in twelve months. Baron Danglars is a good father,
and knows how to calculate.”

Notwithstanding a slight resistance on the part of Monte Cristo, whose
lips turned pale, but who preserved his ceremonious smile, Andrea seized
the count’s hand, pressed it, jumped into his phaeton, and disappeared.

At the moment when the hand of the massive time-piece, representing
Endymion asleep, pointed to nine on its golden face, and the hammer, the
faithful type of mechanical thought, struck nine times, the name of the
Count of Monte Cristo resounded in its turn, and as if by an electric
shock all the assembly turned towards the door. The count was dressed in
black and with his habitual simplicity; his white waistcoat displayed
his expansive noble chest and his black stock was singularly noticeable
because of its contrast with the deadly paleness of his face. His only
jewellery was a chain, so fine that the slender gold thread was scarcely
perceptible on his white waistcoat.

Having accomplished these three social duties, Monte Cristo stopped,
looking around him with that expression peculiar to a certain class,
which seems to say, “I have done my duty, now let others do theirs.”

Andrea, who was in an adjoining room, had shared in the sensation caused
by the arrival of Monte Cristo, and now came forward to pay his respects
to the count. He found him completely surrounded; all were eager to
speak to him, as is always the case with those whose words are few and
weighty. The solicitors arrived at this moment and arranged their
scrawled papers on the velvet cloth embroidered with gold which covered
the table prepared for the signature; it was a gilt table supported on
lions’ claws. One of the notaries sat down, the other remained standing.
They were about to proceed to the reading of the contract, which half
Paris assembled was to sign. All took their places, or rather the ladies
formed a circle, while the gentlemen (more indifferent to the restraints
of what Boileau calls the style énergique) commented on the feverish
agitation of Andrea, on M. Danglars’ riveted attention, Eugénie’s
composure, and the light and sprightly manner in which the baroness
treated this important affair.

“My dear,” said she, as she took the pen, “is it not vexatious? An
unexpected incident, in the affair of murder and theft at the Count of
Monte Cristo’s, in which he nearly fell a victim, deprives us of the
pleasure of seeing M. de Villefort.”

“As a matter of fact,” said Monte Cristo, approaching, “I am much afraid
that I am the involuntary cause of his absence.”

Everyone listened eagerly; Monte Cristo who so rarely opened his lips,
was about to speak.

“Yes, indeed, to you; I succeeded in deciphering your name under the
blood with which the letter was stained,” replied Monte Cristo, amid the
general outburst of amazement.

“In this simple way, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “the waistcoat and
the letter were both what is termed circumstantial evidence; I therefore
sent them to the king’s attorney. You understand, my dear baron, that
legal methods are the safest in criminal cases; it was, perhaps, some
plot against you.” Andrea looked steadily at Monte Cristo and
disappeared in the second drawing-room.

“But go on signing,” said Monte Cristo; “I perceive that my story has
caused a general emotion, and I beg to apologize to you, baroness, and
to Mademoiselle Danglars.”

“What is the matter, sir?” asked Monte Cristo, advancing to meet the
commissioner.

“He is accused,” said the commissary with his inflexible voice, “of
having assassinated the man named Caderousse, his former companion in
prison, at the moment he was making his escape from the house of the
Count of Monte Cristo.”

Monte Cristo cast a rapid glance around him. Andrea was gone.

“When I went to ask M. de Monte Cristo for letters to the directors of
the theatres at Rome and Naples, I expressed my fears of travelling as a
woman; he perfectly understood them, and undertook to procure for me a
man’s passport, and two days after I received this, to which I have
added with my own hand, ‘travelling with his sister.’”

Every morning Morrel called on Noirtier to receive news of Valentine,
and, extraordinary as it seemed, each day found him less uneasy.
Certainly, though Valentine still labored under dreadful nervous
excitement, she was better; and moreover, Monte Cristo had told him
when, half distracted, he had rushed to the count’s house, that if she
were not dead in two hours she would be saved. Now four days had
elapsed, and Valentine still lived.

The nervous excitement of which we speak pursued Valentine even in her
sleep, or rather in that state of somnolence which succeeded her waking
hours; it was then, in the silence of night, in the dim light shed from
the alabaster lamp on the chimney-piece, that she saw the shadows pass
and repass which hover over the bed of sickness, and fan the fever with
their trembling wings. First she fancied she saw her stepmother
threatening her, then Morrel stretched his arms towards her; sometimes
mere strangers, like the Count of Monte Cristo came to visit her; even
the very furniture, in these moments of delirium, seemed to move, and
this state lasted till about three o’clock in the morning, when a deep,
heavy slumber overcame the young girl, from which she did not awake till
daylight.

“The Count of Monte Cristo!” she murmured.

It was easy to see that no doubt now remained in the young girl’s mind
as to the reality of the scene; her eyes started with terror, her hands
trembled, and she rapidly drew the bedclothes closer to her. Still, the
presence of Monte Cristo at such an hour, his mysterious, fanciful, and
extraordinary entrance into her room through the wall, might well seem
impossibilities to her shattered reason.

“Hush, my child,” said Monte Cristo, again placing his finger upon her
lips, “I did say poison and death. But drink some of this;” and the
count took a bottle from his pocket, containing a red liquid, of which
he poured a few drops into the glass. “Drink this, and then take nothing
more tonight.”

Valentine stretched out her hand, but scarcely had she touched the glass
when she drew back in fear. Monte Cristo took the glass, drank half its
contents, and then presented it to Valentine, who smiled and swallowed
the rest.

“Then that explains all,” said Monte Cristo. “Your grandfather knows,
then, that a poisoner lives here; perhaps he even suspects the person.
He has been fortifying you, his beloved child, against the fatal effects
of the poison, which has failed because your system was already
impregnated with it. But even this would have availed little against a
more deadly medium of death employed four days ago, which is generally
but too fatal.”

“You shall know it now, then,” said Monte Cristo, listening.

On recognizing her step-mother, Valentine could not repress a shudder,
which caused a vibration in the bed. Madame de Villefort instantly
stepped back close to the wall, and there, shaded by the bed-curtains,
she silently and attentively watched the slightest movement of
Valentine. The latter recollected the terrible caution of Monte Cristo;
she fancied that the hand not holding the phial clasped a long sharp
knife. Then collecting all her remaining strength, she forced herself to
close her eyes; but this simple operation upon the most delicate organs
of our frame, generally so easy to accomplish, became almost impossible
at this moment, so much did curiosity struggle to retain the eyelid open
and learn the truth. Madame de Villefort, however, reassured by the
silence, which was alone disturbed by the regular breathing of
Valentine, again extended her hand, and half hidden by the curtains
succeeded in emptying the contents of the phial into the glass. Then she
retired so gently that Valentine did not know she had left the room. She
only witnessed the withdrawal of the arm—the fair round arm of a woman
but twenty-five years old, and who yet spread death around her.

The grating against the library-door aroused the young girl from the
stupor in which she was plunged, and which almost amounted to
insensibility. She raised her head with an effort. The noiseless door
again turned on its hinges, and the Count of Monte Cristo reappeared.

Valentine in the extremity of her terror joined her hands,—for she felt
that the moment had arrived to ask for courage,—and began to pray, and
while uttering little more than incoherent words, she forgot that her
white shoulders had no other covering than her long hair, and that the
pulsations of her heart could be seen through the lace of her
nightdress. Monte Cristo gently laid his hand on the young girl’s arm,
drew the velvet coverlet close to her throat, and said with a paternal
smile:

Monte Cristo for some time kept his eyes fixed on the young girl, who
gradually fell asleep, yielding to the effects of the narcotic the count
had given her. Then he took the glass, emptied three parts of the
contents in the fireplace, that it might be supposed Valentine had taken
it, and replaced it on the table; then he disappeared, after throwing a
farewell glance on Valentine, who slept with the confidence and
innocence of an angel at the feet of the Lord.

The two men turned round, and saw Morrel standing at the door, pale and
terror-stricken. This is what had happened. At the usual time, Morrel
had presented himself at the little door leading to Noirtier’s room.
Contrary to custom, the door was open, and having no occasion to ring he
entered. He waited for a moment in the hall and called for a servant to
conduct him to M. Noirtier; but no one answered, the servants having, as
we know, deserted the house. Morrel had no particular reason for
uneasiness; Monte Cristo had promised him that Valentine should live,
and so far he had always fulfilled his word. Every night the count had
given him news, which was the next morning confirmed by Noirtier. Still
this extraordinary silence appeared strange to him, and he called a
second and third time; still no answer. Then he determined to go up.
Noirtier’s room was opened, like all the rest. The first thing he saw
was the old man sitting in his armchair in his usual place, but his eyes
expressed alarm, which was confirmed by the pallor which overspread his
features.

“I am seeking the Count of Monte Cristo” said the young man.

Beauchamp told the truth when he said that on his way to the funeral he
had met Monte Cristo, who was directing his steps towards the Rue de la
Chaussée d’Antin, to M. Danglars’. The banker saw the carriage of the
count enter the courtyard, and advanced to meet him with a sad, though
affable smile.

“Well,” said he, extending his hand to Monte Cristo, “I suppose you have
come to sympathize with me, for indeed misfortune has taken possession
of my house. When I perceived you, I was just asking myself whether I
had not wished harm towards those poor Morcerfs, which would have
justified the proverb of ‘He who wishes misfortunes to happen to others
experiences them himself.’ Well, on my word of honor, I answered, ‘No!’
I wished no ill to Morcerf; he was a little proud, perhaps, for a man
who like myself has risen from nothing; but we all have our faults. Do
you know, count, that persons of our time of life—not that you belong to
the class, you are still a young man,—but as I was saying, persons of
our time of life have been very unfortunate this year. For example, look
at the puritanical procureur, who has just lost his daughter, and in
fact nearly all his family, in so singular a manner; Morcerf dishonored
and dead; and then myself covered with ridicule through the villany of
Benedetto; besides——”

“Still, baron,” said Monte Cristo, “family griefs, or indeed any other
affliction which would crush a man whose child was his only treasure,
are endurable to a millionaire. Philosophers may well say, and practical
men will always support the opinion, that money mitigates many trials;
and if you admit the efficacy of this sovereign balm, you ought to be
very easily consoled—you, the king of finance, the focus of immeasurable
power.”

There was a moment’s silence, during which the noise of the banker’s pen
was alone heard, while Monte Cristo examined the gilt mouldings on the
ceiling.

“Are they Spanish, Haitian, or Neapolitan bonds?” said Monte Cristo.

“One, two, three, four, five,” said Monte Cristo; “five millions—why
what a Crœsus you are!”

“No,” said Monte Cristo folding the five notes, “most decidedly not; the
thing is so curious, I will make the experiment myself. I am credited on
you for six millions. I have drawn nine hundred thousand francs, you
therefore still owe me five millions and a hundred thousand francs. I
will take the five scraps of paper that I now hold as bonds, with your
signature alone, and here is a receipt in full for the six millions
between us. I had prepared it beforehand, for I am much in want of money
today.”

And Monte Cristo placed the bonds in his pocket with one hand, while
with the other he held out the receipt to Danglars. If a thunderbolt had
fallen at the banker’s feet, he could not have experienced greater
terror.

“Oh, well, then,” said Monte Cristo, “I am not particular about these
five notes, pay me in a different form; I wished, from curiosity, to
take these, that I might be able to say that without any advice or
preparation the house of Danglars had paid me five millions without a
minute’s delay; it would have been remarkable. But here are your bonds;
pay me differently;” and he held the bonds towards Danglars, who seized
them like a vulture extending its claws to withhold the food that is
being wrested from its grasp.

Monte Cristo replaced the notes in his pocket with that indescribable
expression which seemed to say, “Come, reflect; if you repent there is
still time.”

“Certainly, I excuse you,” said Monte Cristo graciously, “and pocket
them.” And he placed the bonds in his pocket-book.

“Oh, a mere nothing,” said Monte Cristo. “The balance would come to
about that sum; but keep it, and we shall be quits.”

“I never joke with bankers,” said Monte Cristo in a freezing manner,
which repelled impertinence; and he turned to the door, just as the
valet de chambre announced:

“Ma foi,” said Monte Cristo; “I think I arrived just in time to obtain
your signatures, or they would have been disputed with me.”

“My dear M. de Boville, your widows and orphans must oblige me by
waiting twenty-four hours, since M. de Monte Cristo whom you just saw
leaving here—you did see him, I think?”

“Well, M. de Monte Cristo has just carried off their five millions.”

“Perhaps he knows you, though you do not know him; M. de Monte Cristo
knows everybody.”

“The receipt of M. de Monte Cristo is as good as money; take it to
Rothschild’s or Lafitte’s, and they will take it off your hands at
once.”

Then enclosing Monte Cristo’s receipt in a little pocket-book, he
added:—“Yes, come at twelve o’clock; I shall then be far away.”

As they left Paris, an equipage with four horses, at full speed, was
seen to draw up suddenly; it contained Monte Cristo. The count left the
carriage and mingled in the crowd who followed on foot. Château-Renaud
perceived him and immediately alighting from his coupé, joined him;
Beauchamp did the same.

The count was silent, but continued to gaze around him. At length they
arrived at the cemetery. The piercing eye of Monte Cristo glanced
through clusters of bushes and trees, and was soon relieved from all
anxiety, for seeing a shadow glide between the yew-trees, Monte Cristo
recognized him whom he sought.

The shadow Monte Cristo had noticed passed rapidly behind the tomb of
Abélard and Héloïse, placed itself close to the heads of the horses
belonging to the hearse, and following the undertaker’s men, arrived
with them at the spot appointed for the burial. Each person’s attention
was occupied. Monte Cristo saw nothing but the shadow, which no one else
observed. Twice the count left the ranks to see whether the object of
his interest had any concealed weapon beneath his clothes. When the
procession stopped, this shadow was recognized as Morrel, who, with his
coat buttoned up to his throat, his face livid, and convulsively
crushing his hat between his fingers, leaned against a tree, situated on
an elevation commanding the mausoleum, so that none of the funeral
details could escape his observation.

Monte Cristo heard and saw nothing, or rather he only saw Morrel, whose
calmness had a frightful effect on those who knew what was passing in
his heart.

“No, I do not,” replied Monte Cristo, without even knowing of what or to
whom he was speaking, so much was he occupied in watching Morrel, who
was holding his breath with emotion.

Monte Cristo concealed himself behind a large tomb and awaited the
arrival of Morrel, who by degrees approached the tomb now abandoned by
spectators and workmen. Morrel threw a glance around, but before it
reached the spot occupied by Monte Cristo the latter had advanced yet
nearer, still unperceived. The young man knelt down. The count, with
outstretched neck and glaring eyes, stood in an attitude ready to pounce
upon Morrel upon the first occasion. Morrel bent his head till it
touched the stone, then clutching the grating with both hands, he
murmured:

“I was looking for you, my friend.” Monte Cristo expected a burst of
passion, but he was deceived, for Morrel turning round, said calmly,—

“Excuse me, madame, but I must go up to Maximilian’s room this instant,”
replied Monte Cristo, “I have something of the greatest importance to
tell him.”

Monte Cristo soon ran up the staircase conducting from the ground floor
to Maximilian’s room; when he reached the landing he listened
attentively, but all was still. Like many old houses occupied by a
single family, the room door was panelled with glass; but it was locked,
Maximilian was shut in, and it was impossible to see what was passing in
the room, because a red curtain was drawn before the glass. The count’s
anxiety was manifested by a bright color which seldom appeared on the
face of that imperturbable man.

Monte Cristo trembled from head to foot and as if his determination had
been taken with the rapidity of lightning, he struck one of the panes of
glass with his elbow; the glass was shivered to atoms, then withdrawing
the curtain he saw Morrel, who had been writing at his desk, bound from
his seat at the noise of the broken window.

And passing his hand through the broken glass, the count opened the
door. Morrel, evidently discomposed, came to meet Monte Cristo less with
the intention of receiving him than to exclude his entry.

“Ma foi,” said Monte Cristo, rubbing his elbow, “it’s all your servant’s
fault; your stairs are so polished, it is like walking on glass.”

Monte Cristo advanced into the room; Maximilian was obliged to let him
pass, but he followed him.

“You were writing?” said Monte Cristo with a searching look.

“Your pistols are beside your desk,” said Monte Cristo, pointing with
his finger to the pistols on the table.

“My friend,” exclaimed Monte Cristo in a tone of exquisite sweetness.

Morrel rushed forward to tear it from him, but Monte Cristo perceiving
his intention, seized his wrist with his iron grasp.

“Yes, Morrel,” said Monte Cristo, with a calmness which contrasted
strangely with the young man’s excitement; “yes, I would do so.”

“Yes; you tell me to lay aside the mask, and I will do so, be satisfied!
When you spoke to me at the cemetery, I answered you—my heart was
softened; when you arrived here, I allowed you to enter. But since you
abuse my confidence, since you have devised a new torture after I
thought I had exhausted them all, then, Count of Monte Cristo my
pretended benefactor—then, Count of Monte Cristo, the universal
guardian, be satisfied, you shall witness the death of your friend;” and
Morrel, with a maniacal laugh, again rushed towards the pistols.

“Who am I?” repeated Monte Cristo. “Listen; I am the only man in the
world having the right to say to you, ‘Morrel, your father’s son shall
not die today;’” and Monte Cristo, with an expression of majesty and
sublimity, advanced with arms folded toward the young man, who,
involuntarily overcome by the commanding manner of this man, recoiled a
step.

Monte Cristo endeavored also to leave, but Maximilian would have died
rather than relax his hold of the handle of the door, which he closed
upon the count. Julie, Emmanuel, and some of the servants, ran up in
alarm on hearing the cries of Maximilian. Morrel seized their hands, and
opening the door exclaimed in a voice choked with sobs:

“I cannot explain myself; but watch over him.” Emmanuel looked around
the room and caught sight of the pistols; his eyes rested on the
weapons, and he pointed to them. Monte Cristo bent his head. Emmanuel
went towards the pistols.

“Leave them,” said Monte Cristo. Then walking towards Morrel, he took
his hand; the tumultuous agitation of the young man was succeeded by a
profound stupor. Julie returned, holding the silken purse in her hands,
while tears of joy rolled down her cheeks, like dewdrops on the rose.

“My child,” said Monte Cristo, coloring, “allow me to take back that
purse? Since you now know my face, I wish to be remembered alone through
the affection I hope you will grant me.

“You have guessed rightly, madame,” replied Monte Cristo, smiling; “in a
week I shall have left this country, where so many persons who merit the
vengeance of Heaven lived happily, while my father perished of hunger
and grief.”

Julie saw the means offered of carrying off her precious relic, which
Monte Cristo had forgotten. She drew her husband to the door. “Let us
leave them,” she said.

“My friend,” said Monte Cristo, with an expression of melancholy equal
to his own, “listen to me. One day, in a moment of despair like yours,
since it led to a similar resolution, I also wished to kill myself; one
day your father, equally desperate, wished to kill himself too. If
anyone had said to your father, at the moment he raised the pistol to
his head—if anyone had told me, when in my prison I pushed back the food
I had not tasted for three days—if anyone had said to either of us then,
‘Live—the day will come when you will be happy, and will bless life!’—no
matter whose voice had spoken, we should have heard him with the smile
of doubt, or the anguish of incredulity,—and yet how many times has your
father blessed life while embracing you—how often have I myself——”

“Look at me,” said Monte Cristo, with that expression which sometimes
made him so eloquent and persuasive—“look at me. There are no tears in
my eyes, nor is there fever in my veins, yet I see you suffer—you,
Maximilian, whom I love as my own son. Well, does not this tell you that
in grief, as in life, there is always something to look forward to
beyond? Now, if I entreat, if I order you to live, Morrel, it is in the
conviction that one day you will thank me for having preserved your
life.”

“What can I say more?” asked Monte Cristo. “I have confidence in the
remedy I propose, and only ask you to permit me to assure you of its
efficacy.”

“Then,” said the count, “your feeble spirit will not even grant me the
trial I request? Come—do you know of what the Count of Monte Cristo is
capable? do you know that he holds terrestrial beings under his control?
nay, that he can almost work a miracle? Well, wait for the miracle I
hope to accomplish, or——”

“I not only promise, but swear it!” said Monte Cristo extending his
hand.

Monte Cristo drew the young man towards him, and pressed him for some
time to his heart. “And now,” he said, “after today, you will come and
live with me; you can occupy Haydée’s apartment, and my daughter will at
least be replaced by my son.”

The day after Monte Cristo had called upon Danglars, the mysterious
lodger entered at ten o’clock in the morning instead of four in the
afternoon. Almost directly afterwards, without the usual interval of
time, a cab arrived, and the veiled lady ran hastily upstairs. The door
opened, but before it could be closed, the lady exclaimed:

“The Count of Monte Cristo?”

M. de Villefort had not seen his father since the morning of the death.
The whole establishment had been changed; another valet was engaged for
himself, a new servant for Noirtier, two women had entered Madame de
Villefort’s service,—in fact, everywhere, to the concierge and coachmen,
new faces were presented to the different masters of the house, thus
widening the division which had always existed between the members of
the same family. The assizes, also, were about to begin, and Villefort,
shut up in his room, exerted himself with feverish anxiety in drawing up
the case against the murderer of Caderousse. This affair, like all those
in which the Count of Monte Cristo had interfered, caused a great
sensation in Paris. The proofs were certainly not convincing, since they
rested upon a few words written by an escaped galley-slave on his death-
bed, and who might have been actuated by hatred or revenge in accusing
his companion. But the mind of the procureur was made up; he felt
assured that Benedetto was guilty, and he hoped by his skill in
conducting this aggravated case to flatter his self-love, which was
about the only vulnerable point left in his frozen heart.

“Come, Beauchamp,” said Château-Renaud, “I will bet anything you do not
believe a word of all you have been telling us. But I do not see the
Count of Monte Cristo here.”

“Ah, now I think of it, the Count of Monte Cristo cannot appear in the
hall,” said Beauchamp.

“It is the face of the Count of Monte Cristo!” exclaimed the procureur,
with a haggard expression.

“You are not Busoni?—you are not Monte Cristo? Oh, heavens! you are,
then, some secret, implacable, and mortal enemy! I must have wronged you
in some way at Marseilles. Oh, woe to me!”

“I am the spectre of a wretch you buried in the dungeons of the Château
d’If. God gave that spectre the form of the Count of Monte Cristo when
he at length issued from his tomb, enriched him with gold and diamonds,
and led him to you!”

And up the stairs he dragged Monte Cristo; who, ignorant of what had
happened, followed him in astonishment, foreseeing some new catastrophe.

Monte Cristo became pale at this horrible sight; he felt that he had
passed beyond the bounds of vengeance, and that he could no longer say,
“God is for and with me.” With an expression of indescribable anguish he
threw himself upon the body of the child, reopened its eyes, felt its
pulse, and then rushed with him into Valentine’s room, of which he
double-locked the door.

He tried to follow Monte Cristo; but as though in a dream he was
transfixed to the spot,—his eyes glared as though they were starting
through the sockets; he griped the flesh on his chest until his nails
were stained with blood; the veins of his temples swelled and boiled as
though they would burst their narrow boundary, and deluge his brain with
living fire. This lasted several minutes, until the frightful overturn
of reason was accomplished; then uttering a loud cry followed by a burst
of laughter, he rushed down the stairs.

A quarter of an hour afterwards the door of Valentine’s room opened, and
Monte Cristo reappeared. Pale, with a dull eye and heavy heart, all the
noble features of that face, usually so calm and serene, were overcast
by grief. In his arms he held the child, whom no skill had been able to
recall to life. Bending on one knee, he placed it reverently by the side
of its mother, with its head upon her breast. Then, rising, he went out,
and meeting a servant on the stairs, he asked:

The servant, instead of answering, pointed to the garden. Monte Cristo
ran down the steps, and advancing towards the spot designated beheld
Villefort, encircled by his servants, with a spade in his hand, and
digging the earth with fury.

Monte Cristo approached him, and said in a low voice, with an expression
almost humble:

Monte Cristo drew back in horror.

“No,” replied Monte Cristo; “God grant I may not have done too much
already.”

Emmanuel had scarcely uttered these words when the sound of the bell was
heard, the well-known signal given by the porter that a visitor had
arrived. Nearly at the same instant the door was opened and the Count of
Monte Cristo appeared on the threshold. The young people uttered a cry
of joy, while Maximilian raised his head, but let it fall again
immediately.

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo; “has it not been agreed that I should take you
with me, and did I not tell you yesterday to prepare for departure?”

“Needless delays but increase the grief of parting,” said Monte Cristo,
“and Maximilian has doubtless provided himself with everything
requisite; at least, I advised him to do so.”

“Good,” said Monte Cristo, smiling; “in these prompt arrangements we
recognize the order of a well-disciplined soldier.”

“Pshaw!” said Monte Cristo, “you will see him return to you gay,
smiling, and joyful.”

“We must leave you,” said Monte Cristo.

“Say not so,” quickly returned Monte Cristo—“say not so, my friends;
angels never err, celestial beings remain where they wish to be. Fate is
not more powerful than they; it is they who, on the contrary, overcome
fate. No, Emmanuel, I am but a man, and your admiration is as unmerited
as your words are sacrilegious.”

“Good; he accepts,” said Monte Cristo. “Now let us go.”

Ten leagues were passed and not a single word was uttered. Morrel was
dreaming, and Monte Cristo was looking at the dreamer.

“Here,” said he, leaning heavily on the arm of Monte Cristo,—“here is
the spot where my father stopped, when the Pharaon entered the port; it
was here that the good old man, whom you saved from death and dishonor,
threw himself into my arms. I yet feel his warm tears on my face, and
his were not the only tears shed, for many who witnessed our meeting
wept also.”

Monte Cristo gently smiled and said,—“I was there;” at the same time
pointing to the corner of a street. As he spoke, and in the very
direction he indicated, a groan, expressive of bitter grief, was heard,
and a woman was seen waving her hand to a passenger on board the vessel
about to sail. Monte Cristo looked at her with an emotion that must have
been remarked by Morrel had not his eyes been fixed on the vessel.

“Yes,” said Monte Cristo, “I recognized him.”

The woman whom the count had seen leave the ship with so much regret
entered this house; she had scarcely closed the door after her when
Monte Cristo appeared at the corner of a street, so that he found and
lost her again almost at the same instant. The worn out steps were old
acquaintances of his; he knew better than anyone else how to open that
weather-beaten door with the large headed nail which served to raise the
latch within. He entered without knocking, or giving any other
intimation of his presence, as if he had been a friend or the master of
the place. At the end of a passage paved with bricks, was a little
garden, bathed in sunshine, and rich in warmth and light. In this garden
Mercédès had found, at the place indicated by the count, the sum of
money which he, through a sense of delicacy, had described as having
been placed there twenty-four years previously. The trees of the garden
were easily seen from the steps of the street-door.

Monte Cristo, on stepping into the house, heard a sigh that was almost a
deep sob; he looked in the direction whence it came, and there under an
arbor of Virginia jessamine,29 with its thick foliage and beautiful long
purple flowers, he saw Mercédès seated, with her head bowed, and weeping
bitterly. She had raised her veil, and with her face hidden by her hands
was giving free scope to the sighs and tears which had been so long
restrained by the presence of her son.

Monte Cristo advanced a few steps, which were heard on the gravel.
Mercédès raised her head, and uttered a cry of terror on beholding a man
before her.

“Alas,” said Monte Cristo, “your words sear and embitter my heart, the
more so as you have every reason to hate me. I have been the cause of
all your misfortunes; but why do you pity, instead of blaming me? You
render me still more unhappy——”

Monte Cristo approached her, and silently took her hand.

Mercédès burst into tears; her woman’s heart was breaking under its load
of memories. Monte Cristo took her hand and imprinted a kiss on it; but
she herself felt that it was a kiss of no greater warmth than he would
have bestowed on the hand of some marble statue of a saint.

“No, Mercédès,” said Monte Cristo, “no; you judge yourself with too much
severity. You are a noble-minded woman, and it was your grief that
disarmed me. Still I was but an agent, led on by an invisible and
offended Deity, who chose not to withhold the fatal blow that I was
destined to hurl. I take that God to witness, at whose feet I have
prostrated myself daily for the last ten years, that I would have
sacrificed my life to you, and with my life the projects that were
indissolubly linked with it. But—and I say it with some pride,
Mercédès—God needed me, and I lived. Examine the past and the present,
and endeavor to dive into futurity, and then say whether I am not a
divine instrument. The most dreadful misfortunes, the most frightful
sufferings, the abandonment of all those who loved me, the persecution
of those who did not know me, formed the trials of my youth; when
suddenly, from captivity, solitude, misery, I was restored to light and
liberty, and became the possessor of a fortune so brilliant, so
unbounded, so unheard-of, that I must have been blind not to be
conscious that God had endowed me with it to work out his own great
designs. From that time I looked upon this fortune as something confided
to me for a particular purpose. Not a thought was given to a life which
you once, Mercédès, had the power to render blissful; not one hour of
peaceful calm was mine; but I felt myself driven on like an
exterminating angel. Like adventurous captains about to embark on some
enterprise full of danger, I laid in my provisions, I loaded my weapons,
I collected every means of attack and defence; I inured my body to the
most violent exercises, my soul to the bitterest trials; I taught my arm
to slay, my eyes to behold excruciating sufferings, and my mouth to
smile at the most horrid spectacles. Good-natured, confiding, and
forgiving as I had been, I became revengeful, cunning, and wicked, or
rather, immovable as fate. Then I launched out into the path that was
opened to me. I overcame every obstacle, and reached the goal; but woe
to those who stood in my pathway!”

“Ah, madame,” said Monte Cristo, “you should not talk thus! It is not so
we should evince our resignation to the will of heaven; on the contrary,
we are all free agents.”

Monte Cristo dropped his head and shrank from the vehemence of her
grief.

And after pressing her own trembling hand upon that of the count,
Mercédès rushed up the stairs and disappeared. Monte Cristo slowly left
the house and turned towards the quay. But Mercédès did not witness his
departure, although she was seated at the little window of the room
which had been occupied by old Dantès. Her eyes were straining to see
the ship which was carrying her son over the vast sea; but still her
voice involuntarily murmured softly:

The count departed with a sad heart from the house in which he had left
Mercédès, probably never to behold her again. Since the death of little
Edward a great change had taken place in Monte Cristo. Having reached
the summit of his vengeance by a long and tortuous path, he saw an abyss
of doubt yawning before him. More than this, the conversation which had
just taken place between Mercédès and himself had awakened so many
recollections in his heart that he felt it necessary to combat with
them. A man of the count’s temperament could not long indulge in that
melancholy which can exist in common minds, but which destroys superior
ones. He thought he must have made an error in his calculations if he
now found cause to blame himself.

“Come, then, thou regenerate man, thou extravagant prodigal, thou
awakened sleeper, thou all-powerful visionary, thou invincible
millionaire,—once again review thy past life of starvation and
wretchedness, revisit the scenes where fate and misfortune conducted,
and where despair received thee. Too many diamonds, too much gold and
splendor, are now reflected by the mirror in which Monte Cristo seeks to
behold Dantès. Hide thy diamonds, bury thy gold, shroud thy splendor,
exchange riches for poverty, liberty for a prison, a living body for a
corpse!”

As he thus reasoned, Monte Cristo walked down the Rue de la Caisserie.
It was the same through which, twenty-four years ago, he had been
conducted by a silent and nocturnal guard; the houses, today so smiling
and animated, were on that night dark, mute, and closed.

“And yet they were the same,” murmured Monte Cristo, “only now it is
broad daylight instead of night; it is the sun which brightens the
place, and makes it appear so cheerful.”

He proceeded towards the quay by the Rue Saint-Laurent, and advanced to
the Consigne; it was the point where he had embarked. A pleasure-boat
with striped awning was going by. Monte Cristo called the owner, who
immediately rowed up to him with the eagerness of a boatman hoping for a
good fare.

Monte Cristo remembered that on that very spot, on the same rock, he had
been violently dragged by the guards, who forced him to ascend the slope
at the points of their bayonets. The journey had seemed very long to
Dantès, but Monte Cristo found it equally short. Each stroke of the oar
seemed to awaken a new throng of ideas, which sprang up with the flying
spray of the sea.

The count inquired whether any of the ancient jailers were still there;
but they had all been pensioned, or had passed on to some other
employment. The concierge who attended him had only been there since
1830. He visited his own dungeon. He again beheld the dull light vainly
endeavoring to penetrate the narrow opening. His eyes rested upon the
spot where had stood his bed, since then removed, and behind the bed the
new stones indicated where the breach made by the Abbé Faria had been.
Monte Cristo felt his limbs tremble; he seated himself upon a log of
wood.

Monte Cristo shuddered; Antoine had been his jailer. He had almost
forgotten his name and face, but at the mention of the name he recalled
his person as he used to see it, the face encircled by a beard, wearing
the brown jacket, the bunch of keys, the jingling of which he still
seemed to hear. The count turned around, and fancied he saw him in the
corridor, rendered still darker by the torch carried by the concierge.

“Yes; relate it,” said Monte Cristo, pressing his hand to his heart to
still its violent beatings; he felt afraid of hearing his own history.

“Ah, indeed?—mad!” repeated Monte Cristo; “and what was his mania?”

Monte Cristo raised his eyes, but he could not see the heavens; there
was a stone veil between him and the firmament. He thought that there
had been no less thick a veil before the eyes of those to whom Faria
offered the treasures.

Monte Cristo closed his eyes, and seemed again to experience all the
sensations he had felt when the coarse canvas, yet moist with the cold
dews of death, had touched his face.

“Wait,” said Monte Cristo, “I wish to take one final glance around this
room.”

At this moment the light of the torch was reflected on the wall; the
guide was coming; Monte Cristo went to meet him.

“Ah,” cried Monte Cristo, remembering the abbé’s two hiding-places.

Monte Cristo shuddered, and arose. The concierge held out the strips of
cloth upon which the Abbé Faria had spread the riches of his mind. The
manuscript was the great work by the Abbé Faria upon the kingdoms of
Italy. The count seized it hastily, his eyes immediately fell upon the
epigraph, and he read:

“Alas,” said Monte Cristo, “it is the infirmity of our nature always to
believe ourselves much more unhappy than those who groan by our sides!”

“You have my promise,” he said, after a minute’s pause, extending his
hand to Monte Cristo. “Only remember——”

“On the 5th of October, Morrel, I shall expect you at the Island of
Monte Cristo. On the 4th a yacht will wait for you in the port of
Bastia, it will be called the Eurus. You will give your name to the
captain, who will bring you to me. It is understood—is it not?”

“On the receipt of the Count of Monte Cristo?”

“The Count of Monte Cristo!” said Danglars, more pale from terror than
he had been just before from hunger and misery.

“You are mistaken—I am not the Count of Monte Cristo.”

“Is that Monte Cristo?” asked the traveller, to whose orders the yacht
was for the time submitted, in a melancholy voice.

“Ah, is it you, count?” said the young man, in an almost joyful accent,
pressing Monte Cristo’s hand with both his own.

Monte Cristo perceived that the young man had turned around; indeed,
Morrel saw with surprise that the men who had brought him had left
without being paid, or uttering a word. Already the sound of their oars
might be heard as they returned to the yacht.

“Never mind that, Maximilian,” said Monte Cristo, smiling. “I have made
an agreement with the navy, that the access to my island shall be free
of all charge. I have made a bargain.”

“Be it so,” said the count, “come.” Morrel mechanically followed the
count, and they had entered the grotto before he perceived it. He felt a
carpet under his feet, a door opened, perfumes surrounded him, and a
brilliant light dazzled his eyes. Morrel hesitated to advance; he
dreaded the enervating effect of all that he saw. Monte Cristo drew him
in gently.

He sat down, and Monte Cristo placed himself opposite to him. They were
in the marvellous dining-room before described, where the statues had
baskets on their heads always filled with fruits and flowers. Morrel had
looked carelessly around, and had probably noticed nothing.

Monte Cristo looked upon Morrel with indescribable tenderness. “Yes,” he
said, “yes, doubtless it is painful, if you violently break the outer
covering which obstinately begs for life. If you plunge a dagger into
your flesh, if you insinuate a bullet into your brain, which the least
shock disorders,—then certainly, you will suffer pain, and you will
repent quitting a life for a repose you have bought at so dear a price.”

“It is well,” said Monte Cristo whose countenance brightened at these
words; “you wish it—you are inflexible. Yes, as you said, you are indeed
wretched and a miracle alone can cure you. Sit down, Morrel, and wait.”

“I thank you from the depths of my heart,” said the young man, taking
the spoon from the hands of Monte Cristo. The count took another spoon,
and again dipped it into the golden box. “What are you going to do, my
friend?” asked Morrel, arresting his hand.

And slowly, though without any hesitation, only waiting to press the
count’s hand fervently, he swallowed the mysterious substance offered by
Monte Cristo. Then they were both silent. Ali, mute and attentive,
brought the pipes and coffee, and disappeared. By degrees, the light of
the lamps gradually faded in the hands of the marble statues which held
them, and the perfumes appeared less powerful to Morrel. Seated opposite
to him, Monte Cristo watched him in the shadow, and Morrel saw nothing
but the bright eyes of the count. An overpowering sadness took
possession of the young man, his hands relaxed their hold, the objects
in the room gradually lost their form and color, and his disturbed
vision seemed to perceive doors and curtains open in the wall.

He made a last effort to extend his hand, but it fell powerless beside
him. Then it appeared to him that Monte Cristo smiled, not with the
strange and fearful expression which had sometimes revealed to him the
secrets of his heart, but with the benevolent kindness of a father for a
child. At the same time the count appeared to increase in stature, his
form, nearly double its usual height, stood out in relief against the
red tapestry, his black hair was thrown back, and he stood in the
attitude of an avenging angel. Morrel, overpowered, turned around in the
armchair; a delicious torpor permeated every vein. A change of ideas
presented themselves to his brain, like a new design on the
kaleidoscope. Enervated, prostrate, and breathless, he became
unconscious of outward objects; he seemed to be entering that vague
delirium preceding death. He wished once again to press the count’s
hand, but his own was immovable. He wished to articulate a last
farewell, but his tongue lay motionless and heavy in his throat, like a
stone at the mouth of a sepulchre. Involuntarily his languid eyes
closed, and still through his eyelashes a well-known form seemed to move
amid the obscurity with which he thought himself enveloped.

Monte Cristo pointed out Morrel to the young woman, who advanced towards
him with clasped hands and a smile upon her lips.

“You then love Haydée?” asked Monte Cristo with an emotion he in vain
endeavored to dissimulate.

Monte Cristo turned around; Haydée was standing pale, motionless,
looking at the count with an expression of fearful amazement.

“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “can my suspicions be correct?
Haydée, would it please you not to leave me?”

The next morning at daybreak, Valentine and Morrel were walking arm-in-
arm on the seashore, Valentine relating how Monte Cristo had appeared in
her room, explained everything, revealed the crime, and, finally, how he
had saved her life by enabling her to simulate death.

“Edmond Dantès, Count of Monte Cristo.”

