“A great misfortune, M. Morrel,” replied the young man, “a great
misfortune, for me especially! Off Civita Vecchia we lost our brave
Captain Leclere.”

“Is all safe, M. Morrel; and I think you will be satisfied on that head.
But poor Captain Leclere——”

“Is all safe and sound, M. Morrel, take my word for it; and I advise you
not to take 25,000 francs for the profits of the voyage.”

“Now, if you will come on board, M. Morrel,” said Dantès, observing the
owner’s impatience, “here is your supercargo, M. Danglars, coming out of
his cabin, who will furnish you with every particular. As for me, I must
look after the anchoring, and dress the ship in mourning.”

“Well, M. Morrel,” said Danglars, “you have heard of the misfortune that
has befallen us?”

“And a first-rate seaman, one who had seen long and honorable service,
as became a man charged with the interests of a house so important as
that of Morrel & Son,” replied Danglars.

“As to taking command of the vessel,” replied Morrel, “that was his duty
as captain’s mate; as to losing a day and a half off the Island of Elba,
he was wrong, unless the vessel needed repairs.”

“The vessel was in as good condition as I am, and as, I hope you are, M.
Morrel, and this day and a half was lost from pure whim, for the
pleasure of going ashore, and nothing else.”

“Except your signature and your partner’s, M. Morrel.”

“Your pardon, M. Morrel,” said Dantès, approaching, “the vessel now
rides at anchor, and I am at your service. You hailed me, I think?”

Morrel looked around him, and then, drawing Dantès on one side, he said
suddenly—

“Asked me questions about the vessel, the time she left Marseilles, the
course she had taken, and what was her cargo. I believe, if she had not
been laden, and I had been her master, he would have bought her. But I
told him I was only mate, and that she belonged to the firm of Morrel &
Son. ‘Ah, yes,’ he said, ‘I know them. The Morrels have been shipowners
from father to son; and there was a Morrel who served in the same
regiment with me when I was in garrison at Valence.’”

“Pardieu! and that is true!” cried the owner, greatly delighted. “And
that was Policar Morrel, my uncle, who was afterwards a captain. Dantès,
you must tell my uncle that the emperor remembered him, and you will see
it will bring tears into the old soldier’s eyes. Come, come,” continued
he, patting Edmond’s shoulder kindly, “you did very right, Dantès, to
follow Captain Leclere’s instructions, and touch at Elba, although if it
were known that you had conveyed a packet to the marshal, and had
conversed with the emperor, it might bring you into trouble.”

Danglars reflected for a moment. “Then, M. Morrel, I beg of you,” said
he, “not to say a word to Dantès on the subject. I may have been
mistaken.”

“I really must ask you to excuse me, M. Morrel. My first visit is due to
my father, though I am not the less grateful for the honor you have done
me.”

“I must again excuse myself, M. Morrel, for after this first visit has
been paid I have another which I am most anxious to pay.”

“Sometimes one and the same thing,” said Morrel, with a smile.

“Ah, M. Morrel,” exclaimed the young seaman, with tears in his eyes, and
grasping the owner’s hand, “M. Morrel, I thank you in the name of my
father and of Mercédès.”

“Captain or mate, M. Morrel, I shall always have the greatest respect
for those who possess the owners’ confidence.”

“Then, for the present, M. Morrel, farewell, and a thousand thanks!”

“God forgive me,” said the young man, “for rejoicing at happiness
derived from the misery of others, but, Heaven knows, I did not seek
this good fortune; it has happened, and I really cannot pretend to
lament it. The good Captain Leclere is dead, father, and it is probable
that, with the aid of M. Morrel, I shall have his place. Do you
understand, father? Only imagine me a captain at twenty, with a hundred
louis pay, and a share in the profits! Is this not more than a poor
sailor like me could have hoped for?”

“Yes, yes, Edmond, that is true, but you forgot at that time a little
debt to our neighbor, Caderousse. He reminded me of it, telling me if I
did not pay for you, he would be paid by M. Morrel; and so, you see,
lest he might do you an injury——”

“No doubt, my boy; no doubt. Well, you stand well with M. Morrel I
hear,—you insinuating dog, you!”

“M. Morrel has always been exceedingly kind to me,” replied Dantès.

“But it must have vexed M. Morrel, good, worthy man,” said Caderousse.
“And when you are looking forward to be captain, it was wrong to annoy
the owner.”

“Why, it seems M. Morrel has promised him the thing.”

Danglars, however, who now made his appearance, accompanied by
Caderousse, effectually confirmed the report, stating that he had
recently conversed with M. Morrel, who had himself assured him of his
intention to dine at La Réserve.

In fact, a moment later M. Morrel appeared and was saluted with an
enthusiastic burst of applause from the crew of the Pharaon, who hailed
the visit of the shipowner as a sure indication that the man whose
wedding feast he thus delighted to honor would ere long be first in
command of the ship; and as Dantès was universally beloved on board his
vessel, the sailors put no restraint on their tumultuous joy at finding
that the opinion and choice of their superiors so exactly coincided with
their own.

With the entrance of M. Morrel, Danglars and Caderousse were despatched
in search of the bridegroom to convey to him the intelligence of the
arrival of the important personage whose coming had created such a
lively sensation, and to beseech him to make haste.

As soon as the bridal party came in sight of La Réserve, M. Morrel
descended and came forth to meet it, followed by the soldiers and
sailors there assembled, to whom he had repeated the promise already
given, that Dantès should be the successor to the late Captain Leclere.
Edmond, at the approach of his patron, respectfully placed the arm of
his affianced bride within that of M. Morrel, who, forthwith conducting
her up the flight of wooden steps leading to the chamber in which the
feast was prepared, was gayly followed by the guests, beneath whose
heavy tread the slight structure creaked and groaned for the space of
several minutes.

During this time, Dantès, at the opposite side of the table, had been
occupied in similarly placing his most honored guests. M. Morrel was
seated at his right hand, Danglars at his left; while, at a sign from
Edmond, the rest of the company ranged themselves as they found it most
agreeable.

“Why, thus it is,” replied Dantès. “Thanks to the influence of M.
Morrel, to whom, next to my father, I owe every blessing I enjoy, every
difficulty has been removed. We have purchased permission to waive the
usual delay; and at half-past two o’clock the Mayor of Marseilles will
be waiting for us at the city hall. Now, as a quarter-past one has
already struck, I do not consider I have asserted too much in saying,
that, in another hour and thirty minutes Mercédès will have become
Madame Dantès.”

“May I venture to inquire the reason of this unexpected visit?” said M.
Morrel, addressing the magistrate, whom he evidently knew; “there is
doubtless some mistake easily explained.”

M. Morrel felt that further resistance or remonstrance was useless. He
saw before him an officer delegated to enforce the law, and perfectly
well knew that it would be as unavailing to seek pity from a magistrate
decked with his official scarf, as to address a petition to some cold
marble effigy. Old Dantès, however, sprang forward. There are situations
which the heart of a father or a mother cannot be made to understand. He
prayed and supplicated in terms so moving, that even the officer was
touched, and, although firm in his duty, he kindly said, “My worthy
friend, let me beg of you to calm your apprehensions. Your son has
probably neglected some prescribed form or attention in registering his
cargo, and it is more than probable he will be set at liberty directly
he has given the information required, whether touching the health of
his crew, or the value of his freight.”

“Wait for me here, all of you!” cried M. Morrel; “I will take the first
conveyance I find, and hurry to Marseilles, whence I will bring you word
how all is going on.”

“Good news! good news!” shouted forth one of the party stationed in the
balcony on the lookout. “Here comes M. Morrel back. No doubt, now, we
shall hear that our friend is released!”

“Alas, my friends,” replied M. Morrel, with a mournful shake of his
head, “the thing has assumed a more serious aspect than I expected.”

“That I believe!” answered M. Morrel; “but still he is charged——”

“Could you ever have credited such a thing, my dear Danglars?” asked M.
Morrel, as, on his return to the port for the purpose of gleaning fresh
tidings of Dantès, from M. de Villefort, the assistant procureur, he
overtook his supercargo and Caderousse. “Could you have believed such a
thing possible?”

“Certainly not!” returned Danglars. Then added in a low whisper, “You
understand that, on account of your uncle, M. Policar Morrel, who served
under the other government, and who does not altogether conceal what he
thinks on the subject, you are strongly suspected of regretting the
abdication of Napoleon. I should have feared to injure both Edmond and
yourself, had I divulged my own apprehensions to a soul. I am too well
aware that though a subordinate, like myself, is bound to acquaint the
shipowner with everything that occurs, there are many things he ought
most carefully to conceal from all else.”

“’Tis well, Danglars—’tis well!” replied M. Morrel. “You are a worthy
fellow; and I had already thought of your interests in the event of poor
Edmond having become captain of the Pharaon.”

“But meanwhile,” continued M. Morrel, “here is the Pharaon without a
captain.”

“I am entirely at your service, M. Morrel,” answered Danglars. “You know
that I am as capable of managing a ship as the most experienced captain
in the service; and it will be so far advantageous to you to accept my
services, that upon Edmond’s release from prison no further change will
be requisite on board the Pharaon than for Dantès and myself each to
resume our respective posts.”

“Be easy on that score, M. Morrel; but do you think we shall be
permitted to see our poor Edmond?”

“Well, well,” returned M. Morrel, “we shall see. But now hasten on
board, I will join you there ere long.”

“So far, then,” said Danglars, mentally, “all has gone as I would have
it. I am, temporarily, commander of the Pharaon, with the certainty of
being permanently so, if that fool of a Caderousse can be persuaded to
hold his tongue. My only fear is the chance of Dantès being released.
But, there, he is in the hands of Justice; and,” added he with a smile,
“she will take her own.” So saying, he leaped into a boat, desiring to
be rowed on board the Pharaon, where M. Morrel had agreed to meet him.

“We know nothing as yet of the conspiracy, monsieur; all the papers
found have been sealed up and placed on your desk. The prisoner himself
is named Edmond Dantès, mate on board the three-master the Pharaon,
trading in cotton with Alexandria and Smyrna, and belonging to Morrel &
Son, of Marseilles.”

At this moment, and as Villefort had arrived at the corner of the Rue
des Conseils, a man, who seemed to have been waiting for him,
approached; it was M. Morrel.

“Oh,” said Morrel, carried away by his friendship, “you do not know him,
and I do. He is the most estimable, the most trustworthy creature in the
world, and I will venture to say, there is not a better seaman in all
the merchant service. Oh, M. de Villefort, I beseech your indulgence for
him.”

Villefort, as we have seen, belonged to the aristocratic party at
Marseilles, Morrel to the plebeian; the first was a royalist, the other
suspected of Bonapartism. Villefort looked disdainfully at Morrel, and
replied coldly:

The magistrate laid emphasis on these words, as if he wished to apply
them to the owner himself, while his eyes seemed to plunge into the
heart of one who, interceding for another, had himself need of
indulgence. Morrel reddened, for his own conscience was not quite clear
on politics; besides, what Dantès had told him of his interview with the
grand-marshal, and what the emperor had said to him, embarrassed him. He
replied, however, in a tone of deep interest:

Rapid as had been Villefort’s glance, it had served to give him an idea
of the man he was about to interrogate. He had recognized intelligence
in the high forehead, courage in the dark eye and bent brow, and
frankness in the thick lips that showed a set of pearly teeth.
Villefort’s first impression was favorable; but he had been so often
warned to mistrust first impulses, that he applied the maxim to the
impression, forgetting the difference between the two words. He stifled,
therefore, the feelings of compassion that were rising, composed his
features, and sat down, grim and sombre, at his desk. An instant after
Dantès entered. He was pale, but calm and collected, and saluting his
judge with easy politeness, looked round for a seat, as if he had been
in M. Morrel’s salon. It was then that he encountered for the first time
Villefort’s look,—that look peculiar to the magistrate, who, while
seeming to read the thoughts of others, betrays nothing of his own.

“My name is Edmond Dantès,” replied the young man calmly; “I am mate of
the Pharaon, belonging to Messrs. Morrel & Son.”

“My political opinions!” replied Dantès. “Alas, sir, I never had any
opinions. I am hardly nineteen; I know nothing; I have no part to play.
If I obtain the situation I desire, I shall owe it to M. Morrel. Thus
all my opinions—I will not say public, but private—are confined to these
three sentiments,—I love my father, I respect M. Morrel, and I adore
Mercédès. This, sir, is all I can tell you, and you see how
uninteresting it is.” As Dantès spoke, Villefort gazed at his ingenuous
and open countenance, and recollected the words of Renée, who, without
knowing who the culprit was, had besought his indulgence for him. With
the deputy’s knowledge of crime and criminals, every word the young man
uttered convinced him more and more of his innocence. This lad, for he
was scarcely a man,—simple, natural, eloquent with that eloquence of the
heart never found when sought for; full of affection for everybody,
because he was happy, and because happiness renders even the wicked
good—extended his affection even to his judge, spite of Villefort’s
severe look and stern accent. Dantès seemed full of kindness.

“What I ought to have done, and what everyone would have done in my
place. Everywhere the last requests of a dying man are sacred; but with
a sailor the last requests of his superior are commands. I sailed for
the Island of Elba, where I arrived the next day; I ordered everybody to
remain on board, and went on shore alone. As I had expected, I found
some difficulty in obtaining access to the grand-marshal; but I sent the
ring I had received from the captain to him, and was instantly admitted.
He questioned me concerning Captain Leclere’s death; and, as the latter
had told me, gave me a letter to carry on to a person in Paris. I
undertook it because it was what my captain had bade me do. I landed
here, regulated the affairs of the vessel, and hastened to visit my
affianced bride, whom I found more lovely than ever. Thanks to M.
Morrel, all the forms were got over; in a word I was, as I told you, at
my marriage feast; and I should have been married in an hour, and
tomorrow I intended to start for Paris, had I not been arrested on this
charge which you as well as I now see to be unjust.”

M. Morrel had not readily given up the fight. He had learned that Dantès
had been taken to prison, and he had gone to all his friends, and the
influential persons of the city; but the report was already in
circulation that Dantès was arrested as a Bonapartist agent; and as the
most sanguine looked upon any attempt of Napoleon to remount the throne
as impossible, he met with nothing but refusal, and had returned home in
despair, declaring that the matter was serious and that nothing more
could be done.

Caderousse was equally restless and uneasy, but instead of seeking, like
M. Morrel, to aid Dantès, he had shut himself up with two bottles of
black currant brandy, in the hope of drowning reflection. But he did not
succeed, and became too intoxicated to fetch any more drink, and yet not
so intoxicated as to forget what had happened. With his elbows on the
table he sat between the two empty bottles, while spectres danced in the
light of the unsnuffed candle—spectres such as Hoffmann strews over his
punch-drenched pages, like black, fantastic dust.

Owing to this change, the worthy shipowner became at that moment—we will
not say all powerful, because Morrel was a prudent and rather a timid
man, so much so, that many of the most zealous partisans of Bonaparte
accused him of “moderation”—but sufficiently influential to make a
demand in favor of Dantès.

Villefort retained his place, but his marriage was put off until a more
favorable opportunity. If the emperor remained on the throne, Gérard
required a different alliance to aid his career; if Louis XVIII.
returned, the influence of M. de Saint-Méran, like his own, could be
vastly increased, and the marriage be still more suitable. The deputy
procureur was, therefore, the first magistrate of Marseilles, when one
morning his door opened, and M. Morrel was announced.

Anyone else would have hastened to receive him; but Villefort was a man
of ability, and he knew this would be a sign of weakness. He made Morrel
wait in the antechamber, although he had no one with him, for the simple
reason that the king’s procureur always makes everyone wait, and after
passing a quarter of an hour in reading the papers, he ordered M. Morrel
to be admitted.

Morrel expected Villefort would be dejected; he found him as he had
found him six weeks before, calm, firm, and full of that glacial
politeness, that most insurmountable barrier which separates the well-
bred from the vulgar man.

“M. Morrel, I believe?” said Villefort.

“Do you not guess, monsieur?” asked Morrel.

“Monsieur,” said Morrel, recovering his assurance as he proceeded, “do
you recollect that a few days before the landing of his majesty the
emperor, I came to intercede for a young man, the mate of my ship, who
was accused of being concerned in correspondence with the Island of
Elba? What was the other day a crime is today a title to favor. You then
served Louis XVIII., and you did not show any favor—it was your duty;
today you serve Napoleon, and you ought to protect him—it is equally
your duty; I come, therefore, to ask what has become of him?”

“Yes, monsieur.” Villefort opened a large register, then went to a
table, from the table turned to his registers, and then, turning to
Morrel,

Had Morrel been a more quick-sighted man, or better versed in these
matters, he would have been surprised at the king’s procureur answering
him on such a subject, instead of referring him to the governors of the
prison or the prefect of the department. But Morrel, disappointed in his
expectations of exciting fear, was conscious only of the other’s
condescension. Villefort had calculated rightly.

“No,” said Morrel; “I am not mistaken. I have known him for ten years,
the last four of which he was in my service. Do not you recollect, I
came about six weeks ago to plead for clemency, as I come today to plead
for justice. You received me very coldly. Oh, the royalists were very
severe with the Bonapartists in those days.”

“That’s right!” cried Morrel. “I like to hear you speak thus, and I
augur well for Edmond from it.”

“Carried off!” said Morrel. “What can they have done with him?”

“Do not be too hasty, M. Morrel,” replied Villefort. “The order of
imprisonment came from high authority, and the order for his liberation
must proceed from the same source; and, as Napoleon has scarcely been
reinstated a fortnight, the letters have not yet been forwarded.”

“But,” said Morrel, “is there no way of expediting all these
formalities—of releasing him from arrest?”

“It has always been so, my dear Morrel, since the reign of Louis XIV.
The emperor is more strict in prison discipline than even Louis himself,
and the number of prisoners whose names are not on the register is
incalculable.” Had Morrel even any suspicions, so much kindness would
have dispelled them.

“Sit down there,” said Villefort, giving up his place to Morrel, “and
write what I dictate.”

“I will do whatever is necessary.” This assurance delighted Morrel, who
took leave of Villefort, and hastened to announce to old Dantès that he
would soon see his son.

Twice during the Hundred Days had Morrel renewed his demand, and twice
had Villefort soothed him with promises. At last there was Waterloo, and
Morrel came no more; he had done all that was in his power, and any
fresh attempt would only compromise himself uselessly.

Danglars comprehended the full extent of the wretched fate that
overwhelmed Dantès; and, when Napoleon returned to France, he, after the
manner of mediocre minds, termed the coincidence, a decree of
Providence. But when Napoleon returned to Paris, Danglars’ heart failed
him, and he lived in constant fear of Dantès’ return on a mission of
vengeance. He therefore informed M. Morrel of his wish to quit the sea,
and obtained a recommendation from him to a Spanish merchant, into whose
service he entered at the end of March, that is, ten or twelve days
after Napoleon’s return. He then left for Madrid, and was no more heard
of.

Caderousse was, like Fernand, enrolled in the army, but, being married
and eight years older, he was merely sent to the frontier. Old Dantès,
who was only sustained by hope, lost all hope at Napoleon’s downfall.
Five months after he had been separated from his son, and almost at the
hour of his arrest, he breathed his last in Mercédès’ arms. M. Morrel
paid the expenses of his funeral, and a few small debts the poor old man
had contracted.

“Why, he was not altogether forsaken,” continued Caderousse, “for
Mercédès the Catalan and Monsieur Morrel were very kind to him; but
somehow the poor old man had contracted a profound hatred for
Fernand—the very person,” added Caderousse with a bitter smile, “that
you named just now as being one of Dantès’ faithful and attached
friends.”

“Well, when Dantès was arrested, Monsieur Morrel hastened to obtain the
particulars, and they were very sad. The old man returned alone to his
home, folded up his wedding suit with tears in his eyes, and paced up
and down his chamber the whole day, and would not go to bed at all, for
I was underneath him and heard him walking the whole night; and for
myself, I assure you I could not sleep either, for the grief of the poor
father gave me great uneasiness, and every step he took went to my heart
as really as if his foot had pressed against my breast.

“From day to day he lived on alone, and more and more solitary. M.
Morrel and Mercédès came to see him, but his door was closed; and,
although I was certain he was at home, he would not make any answer. One
day, when, contrary to his custom, he had admitted Mercédès, and the
poor girl, in spite of her own grief and despair, endeavored to console
him, he said to her,—‘Be assured, my dear daughter, he is dead; and
instead of expecting him, it is he who is awaiting us; I am quite happy,
for I am the oldest, and of course shall see him first.’

“For the first three days I heard him walking about as usual, but, on
the fourth I heard nothing. I then resolved to go up to him at all
risks. The door was closed, but I looked through the keyhole, and saw
him so pale and haggard, that believing him very ill, I went and told M.
Morrel and then ran on to Mercédès. They both came immediately, M.
Morrel bringing a doctor, and the doctor said it was inflammation of the
bowels, and ordered him a limited diet. I was there, too, and I never
shall forget the old man’s smile at this prescription.

“Mercédès came again, and she found him so altered that she was even
more anxious than before to have him taken to her own home. This was M.
Morrel’s wish also, who would fain have conveyed the old man against his
consent; but the old man resisted, and cried so that they were actually
frightened. Mercédès remained, therefore, by his bedside, and M. Morrel
went away, making a sign to the Catalan that he had left his purse on
the chimney-piece; but, availing himself of the doctor’s order, the old
man would not take any sustenance; at length (after nine days of despair
and fasting), the old man died, cursing those who had caused his misery,
and saying to Mercédès, ‘If you ever see my Edmond again, tell him I die
blessing him.’”

“You have two or three times mentioned a M. Morrel,” he said; “who was
he?”

“And,” asked the abbé, “is M. Morrel still alive?”

“What! M. Morrel unhappy?” exclaimed the abbé.

“Yes,” continued Caderousse, “so it is; after five-and-twenty years of
labor, after having acquired a most honorable name in the trade of
Marseilles, M. Morrel is utterly ruined; he has lost five ships in two
years, has suffered by the bankruptcy of three large houses, and his
only hope now is in that very Pharaon which poor Dantès commanded, and
which is expected from the Indies with a cargo of cochineal and indigo.
If this ship founders, like the others, he is a ruined man.”

“What has become of him? Why, he left Marseilles, and was taken, on the
recommendation of M. Morrel, who did not know his crime, as cashier into
a Spanish bank. During the war with Spain he was employed in the
commissariat of the French army, and made a fortune; then with that
money he speculated in the funds, and trebled or quadrupled his capital;
and, having first married his banker’s daughter, who left him a widower,
he has married a second time, a widow, a Madame de Nargonne, daughter of
M. de Servieux, the king’s chamberlain, who is in high favor at court.
He is a millionaire, and they have made him a baron, and now he is the
Baron Danglars, with a fine residence in the Rue du Mont-Blanc, with ten
horses in his stables, six footmen in his antechamber, and I know not
how many millions in his strongbox.”

“In exchange,” he continued, “give me the red silk purse that M. Morrel
left on old Dantès’ chimney-piece, and which you tell me is still in
your hands.”

“Sir,” said he, “I am chief clerk of the house of Thomson & French, of
Rome. We are, and have been these ten years, connected with the house of
Morrel & Son, of Marseilles. We have a hundred thousand francs or
thereabouts loaned on their securities, and we are a little uneasy at
reports that have reached us that the firm is on the brink of ruin. I
have come, therefore, express from Rome, to ask you for information.”

“Sir,” replied the mayor. “I know very well that during the last four or
five years misfortune has seemed to pursue M. Morrel. He has lost four
or five vessels, and suffered by three or four bankruptcies; but it is
not for me, although I am a creditor myself to the amount of ten
thousand francs, to give any information as to the state of his
finances. Ask of me, as mayor, what is my opinion of M. Morrel, and I
shall say that he is a man honorable to the last degree, and who has up
to this time fulfilled every engagement with scrupulous punctuality.
This is all I can say, sir; if you wish to learn more, address yourself
to M. de Boville, the inspector of prisons, No. 15, Rue de Nouailles; he
has, I believe, two hundred thousand francs in Morrel’s hands, and if
there be any grounds for apprehension, as this is a greater amount than
mine, you will most probably find him better informed than myself.”

“Oh, sir,” exclaimed M. de Boville, “your fears are unfortunately but
too well founded, and you see before you a man in despair. I had two
hundred thousand francs placed in the hands of Morrel & Son; these two
hundred thousand francs were the dowry of my daughter, who was to be
married in a fortnight, and these two hundred thousand francs were
payable, half on the 15th of this month, and the other half on the 15th
of next month. I had informed M. Morrel of my desire to have these
payments punctually, and he has been here within the last half-hour to
tell me that if his ship, the Pharaon, did not come into port on the
15th, he would be wholly unable to make this payment.”

And they both entered M. de Boville’s study. Everything was here
arranged in perfect order; each register had its number, each file of
papers its place. The inspector begged the Englishman to seat himself in
an armchair, and placed before him the register and documents relative
to the Château d’If, giving him all the time he desired for the
examination, while De Boville seated himself in a corner, and began to
read his newspaper. The Englishman easily found the entries relative to
the Abbé Faria; but it seemed that the history which the inspector had
related interested him greatly, for after having perused the first
documents he turned over the leaves until he reached the deposition
respecting Edmond Dantès. There he found everything arranged in due
order,—the accusation, examination, Morrel’s petition, M. de Villefort’s
marginal notes. He folded up the accusation quietly, and put it as
quietly in his pocket; read the examination, and saw that the name of
Noirtier was not mentioned in it; perused, too, the application dated
10th April, 1815, in which Morrel, by the deputy procureur’s advice,
exaggerated with the best intentions (for Napoleon was then on the
throne) the services Dantès had rendered to the imperial cause—services
which Villefort’s certificates rendered indisputable. Then he saw
through the whole thing. This petition to Napoleon, kept back by
Villefort, had become, under the second restoration, a terrible weapon
against him in the hands of the king’s attorney. He was no longer
astonished when he searched on to find in the register this note, placed
in a bracket against his name:

He compared the writing in the bracket with the writing of the
certificate placed beneath Morrel’s petition, and discovered that the
note in the bracket was the same writing as the certificate—that is to
say, was in Villefort’s handwriting.

Chapter 29. The House of Morrel & Son

Anyone who had quitted Marseilles a few years previously, well
acquainted with the interior of Morrel’s warehouse, and had returned at
this date, would have found a great change. Instead of that air of life,
of comfort, and of happiness that permeates a flourishing and prosperous
business establishment—instead of merry faces at the windows, busy
clerks hurrying to and fro in the long corridors—instead of the court
filled with bales of goods, re-echoing with the cries and the jokes of
porters, one would have immediately perceived all aspect of sadness and
gloom. Out of all the numerous clerks that used to fill the deserted
corridor and the empty office, but two remained. One was a young man of
three or four-and-twenty, who was in love with M. Morrel’s daughter, and
had remained with him in spite of the efforts of his friends to induce
him to withdraw; the other was an old one-eyed cashier, called “Cocles,”
or “Cock-eye,” a nickname given him by the young men who used to throng
this vast now almost deserted bee-hive, and which had so completely
replaced his real name that he would not, in all probability, have
replied to anyone who addressed him by it.

Cocles remained in M. Morrel’s service, and a most singular change had
taken place in his position; he had at the same time risen to the rank
of cashier, and sunk to the rank of a servant. He was, however, the same
Cocles, good, patient, devoted, but inflexible on the subject of
arithmetic, the only point on which he would have stood firm against the
world, even against M. Morrel; and strong in the multiplication-table,
which he had at his fingers’ ends, no matter what scheme or what trap
was laid to catch him.

Nothing had as yet occurred to shake Cocles’ belief; the last month’s
payment had been made with the most scrupulous exactitude; Cocles had
detected an overbalance of fourteen sous in his cash, and the same
evening he had brought them to M. Morrel, who, with a melancholy smile,
threw them into an almost empty drawer, saying:

Cocles went away perfectly happy, for this eulogium of M. Morrel,
himself the pearl of the honest men of Marseilles, flattered him more
than a present of fifty crowns. But since the end of the month M. Morrel
had passed many an anxious hour.

In order to meet the payments then due; he had collected all his
resources, and, fearing lest the report of his distress should get
bruited abroad at Marseilles when he was known to be reduced to such an
extremity, he went to the Beaucaire fair to sell his wife’s and
daughter’s jewels and a portion of his plate. By this means the end of
the month was passed, but his resources were now exhausted. Credit,
owing to the reports afloat, was no longer to be had; and to meet the
one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th of the present month, and
the one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th of the next month to M.
de Boville, M. Morrel had, in reality, no hope but the return of the
Pharaon, of whose departure he had learnt from a vessel which had
weighed anchor at the same time, and which had already arrived in
harbor.

Such was the state of affairs when, the day after his interview with M.
de Boville, the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French of
Rome, presented himself at M. Morrel’s.

Emmanuel received him; this young man was alarmed by the appearance of
every new face, for every new face might be that of a new creditor, come
in anxiety to question the head of the house. The young man, wishing to
spare his employer the pain of this interview, questioned the new-comer;
but the stranger declared that he had nothing to say to M. Emmanuel, and
that his business was with M. Morrel in person.

Emmanuel sighed, and summoned Cocles. Cocles appeared, and the young man
bade him conduct the stranger to M. Morrel’s apartment. Cocles went
first, and the stranger followed him. On the staircase they met a
beautiful girl of sixteen or seventeen, who looked with anxiety at the
stranger.

“M. Morrel is in his room, is he not, Mademoiselle Julie?” said the
cashier.

“It will be useless to announce me, mademoiselle,” returned the
Englishman. “M. Morrel does not know my name; this worthy gentleman has
only to announce the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French
of Rome, with whom your father does business.”

The Englishman entered, and found Morrel seated at a table, turning over
the formidable columns of his ledger, which contained the list of his
liabilities. At the sight of the stranger, M. Morrel closed the ledger,
arose, and offered a seat to the stranger; and when he had seen him
seated, resumed his own chair. Fourteen years had changed the worthy
merchant, who, in his thirty-sixth year at the opening of this history,
was now in his fiftieth; his hair had turned white, time and sorrow had
ploughed deep furrows on his brow, and his look, once so firm and
penetrating, was now irresolute and wandering, as if he feared being
forced to fix his attention on some particular thought or person.

The Englishman looked at him with an air of curiosity, evidently mingled
with interest. “Monsieur,” said Morrel, whose uneasiness was increased
by this examination, “you wish to speak to me?”

Morrel sighed deeply, and passed his hand over his forehead, which was
covered with perspiration.

“So then, sir,” said Morrel, “you hold bills of mine?”

“What is the amount?” asked Morrel with a voice he strove to render
firm.

“I recognize them,” said Morrel, whose face was suffused, as he thought
that, for the first time in his life, he would be unable to honor his
own signature. “Is this all?”

It is impossible to describe what Morrel suffered during this
enumeration. “Two hundred and eighty-seven thousand five hundred
francs,” repeated he.

At this almost brutal speech Morrel turned deathly pale.

“Sir,” said he, “up to this time—and it is now more than four-and-twenty
years since I received the direction of this house from my father, who
had himself conducted it for five-and-thirty years—never has anything
bearing the signature of Morrel & Son been dishonored.”

Morrel shuddered, and looked at the man, who spoke with more assurance
than he had hitherto shown.

“Well,” returned Morrel, “it is a cruel thing to be forced to say, but,
already used to misfortune, I must habituate myself to shame. I fear I
shall be forced to suspend payment.”

Morrel smiled mournfully.

“Shall I tell you plainly one thing, sir? I dread almost as much to
receive any tidings of my vessel as to remain in doubt. Uncertainty is
still hope.” Then in a low voice Morrel added,—“This delay is not
natural. The Pharaon left Calcutta the 5th of February; she ought to
have been here a month ago.”

“Oh, my God!” cried Morrel, turning pale, “what is it?”

A loud noise was heard on the stairs of people moving hastily, and half-
stifled sobs. Morrel rose and advanced to the door; but his strength
failed him and he sank into a chair. The two men remained opposite one
another, Morrel trembling in every limb, the stranger gazing at him with
an air of profound pity. The noise had ceased; but it seemed that Morrel
expected something—something had occasioned the noise, and something
must follow. The stranger fancied he heard footsteps on the stairs; and
that the footsteps, which were those of several persons, stopped at the
door. A key was inserted in the lock of the first door, and the creaking
of hinges was audible.

“There are only two persons who have the key to that door,” murmured
Morrel, “Cocles and Julie.”

At this instant the second door opened, and the young girl, her eyes
bathed with tears, appeared. Morrel rose tremblingly, supporting himself
by the arm of the chair. He would have spoken, but his voice failed him.

Morrel again changed color. Julie threw herself into his arms.

“The Pharaon has gone down, then?” said Morrel in a hoarse voice. The
young girl did not speak; but she made an affirmative sign with her head
as she lay on her father’s breast.

“And the crew?” asked Morrel.

Morrel raised his two hands to heaven with an expression of resignation
and sublime gratitude.

“Come in, come in,” said Morrel, “for I presume you are all at the
door.”

Scarcely had he uttered those words when Madame Morrel entered weeping
bitterly. Emmanuel followed her, and in the antechamber were visible the
rough faces of seven or eight half-naked sailors. At the sight of these
men the Englishman started and advanced a step; then restrained himself,
and retired into the farthest and most obscure corner of the apartment.
Madame Morrel sat down by her husband and took one of his hands in hers,
Julie still lay with her head on his shoulder, Emmanuel stood in the
centre of the chamber and seemed to form the link between Morrel’s
family and the sailors at the door.

“How did this happen?” said Morrel.

“Good-day, M. Morrel,” said he, as if he had just quitted Marseilles the
previous evening, and had just returned from Aix or Toulon.

“Good-day, Penelon,” returned Morrel, who could not refrain from smiling
through his tears, “where is the captain?”

“The captain, M. Morrel,—he has stayed behind sick at Palma; but please
God, it won’t be much, and you will see him in a few days all alive and
hearty.”

“You see, M. Morrel,” said he, “we were somewhere between Cape Blanc and
Cape Boyador, sailing with a fair breeze, south-south-west after a
week’s calm, when Captain Gaumard comes up to me—I was at the helm I
should tell you—and says, ‘Penelon, what do you think of those clouds
coming up over there?’ I was just then looking at them myself. ‘What do
I think, captain? Why I think that they are rising faster than they have
any business to do, and that they would not be so black if they didn’t
mean mischief.’—‘That’s my opinion too,’ said the captain, ‘and I’ll
take precautions accordingly. We are carrying too much canvas. Avast,
there, all hands! Take in the studding-sails and stow the flying jib.’
It was time; the squall was on us, and the vessel began to heel. ‘Ah,’
said the captain, ‘we have still too much canvas set; all hands lower
the mainsail!’ Five minutes after, it was down; and we sailed under
mizzen-topsails and top-gallant sails. ‘Well, Penelon,’ said the
captain, ‘what makes you shake your head?’ ‘Why,’ I says, ‘I still think
you’ve got too much on.’ ‘I think you’re right,’ answered he, ‘we shall
have a gale.’ ‘A gale? More than that, we shall have a tempest, or I
don’t know what’s what.’ You could see the wind coming like the dust at
Montredon; luckily the captain understood his business. ‘Take in two
reefs in the top-sails,’ cried the captain; ‘let go the bowlin’s, haul
the brace, lower the top-gallant sails, haul out the reef-tackles on the
yards.’”

“There’s nothing gives you so much courage as good reasons,” continued
the sailor; “and during that time the wind had abated, and the sea gone
down, but the water kept rising; not much, only two inches an hour, but
still it rose. Two inches an hour does not seem much, but in twelve
hours that makes two feet, and three we had before, that makes five.
‘Come,’ said the captain, ‘we have done all in our power, and M. Morrel
will have nothing to reproach us with, we have tried to save the ship,
let us now save ourselves. To the boats, my lads, as quick as you can.’
Now,” continued Penelon, “you see, M. Morrel, a sailor is attached to
his ship, but still more to his life, so we did not wait to be told
twice; the more so, that the ship was sinking under us, and seemed to
say, ‘Get along—save yourselves.’ We soon launched the boat, and all
eight of us got into it. The captain descended last, or rather, he did
not descend, he would not quit the vessel; so I took him round the
waist, and threw him into the boat, and then I jumped after him. It was
time, for just as I jumped the deck burst with a noise like the
broadside of a man-of-war. Ten minutes after she pitched forward, then
the other way, spun round and round, and then good-bye to the Pharaon.
As for us, we were three days without anything to eat or drink, so that
we began to think of drawing lots who should feed the rest, when we saw
La Gironde; we made signals of distress, she perceived us, made for us,
and took us all on board. There now, M. Morrel, that’s the whole truth,
on the honor of a sailor; is not it true, you fellows there?” A general
murmur of approbation showed that the narrator had faithfully detailed
their misfortunes and sufferings.

“Well, well,” said M. Morrel, “I know there was no one in fault but
destiny. It was the will of God that this should happen, blessed be his
name. What wages are due to you?”

“Oh, don’t let us talk of that, M. Morrel.”

“Cocles, pay two hundred francs to each of these good fellows,” said
Morrel. “At another time,” added he, “I should have said, Give them,
besides, two hundred francs over as a present; but times are changed,
and the little money that remains to me is not my own, so do not think
me mean on this account.”

“As for that, M. Morrel,” said he, again turning his quid, “as for
that——”

“Thanks, my friends, thanks!” cried Morrel gratefully; “take it—take it;
and if you can find another employer, enter his service; you are free to
do so.”

“What, M. Morrel!” said he in a low voice, “you send us away; you are
then angry with us!”

“No, no,” said M. Morrel, “I am not angry, quite the contrary, and I do
not send you away; but I have no more ships, and therefore I do not want
any sailors.”

“Enough, enough!” cried Morrel, almost overpowered; “leave me, I pray
you; we shall meet again in a happier time. Emmanuel, go with them, and
see that my orders are executed.”

“At least, we shall see each other again, M. Morrel?” asked Penelon.

And he glanced towards the clerk of Thomson & French, who had remained
motionless in the corner during this scene, in which he had taken no
part, except the few words we have mentioned. The two women looked at
this person whose presence they had entirely forgotten, and retired;
but, as she left the apartment, Julie gave the stranger a supplicating
glance, to which he replied by a smile that an indifferent spectator
would have been surprised to see on his stern features. The two men were
left alone. “Well, sir,” said Morrel, sinking into a chair, “you have
heard all, and I have nothing further to tell you.”

“Oh, sir!” cried Morrel.

Morrel reflected. “Two months,” said he.

“But,” asked Morrel, “will the house of Thomson & French consent?”

“I shall expect you,” returned Morrel; “and I will pay you—or I shall be
dead.” These last words were uttered in so low a tone that the stranger
could not hear them. The bills were renewed, the old ones destroyed, and
the poor ship-owner found himself with three months before him to
collect his resources. The Englishman received his thanks with the
phlegm peculiar to his nation; and Morrel, overwhelming him with
grateful blessings, conducted him to the staircase. The stranger met
Julie on the stairs; she pretended to be descending, but in reality she
was waiting for him. “Oh, sir”—said she, clasping her hands.

The extension provided for by the agent of Thomson & French, at the
moment when Morrel expected it least, was to the poor shipowner so
decided a stroke of good fortune that he almost dared to believe that
fate was at length grown weary of wasting her spite upon him. The same
day he told his wife, Emmanuel, and his daughter all that had occurred;
and a ray of hope, if not of tranquillity, returned to the family.
Unfortunately, however, Morrel had not only engagements with the house
of Thomson & French, who had shown themselves so considerate towards
him; and, as he had said, in business he had correspondents, and not
friends. When he thought the matter over, he could by no means account
for this generous conduct on the part of Thomson & French towards him;
and could only attribute it to some such selfish argument as this: “We
had better help a man who owes us nearly 300,000 francs, and have those
300,000 francs at the end of three months than hasten his ruin, and get
only six or eight per cent of our money back again.”

Unfortunately, whether through envy or stupidity, all Morrel’s
correspondents did not take this view; and some even came to a contrary
decision. The bills signed by Morrel were presented at his office with
scrupulous exactitude, and, thanks to the delay granted by the
Englishman, were paid by Cocles with equal punctuality. Cocles thus
remained in his accustomed tranquillity. It was Morrel alone who
remembered with alarm, that if he had to repay on the 15th the 50,000
francs of M. de Boville, and on the 30th the 32,500 francs of bills, for
which, as well as the debt due to the inspector of prisons, he had time
granted, he must be a ruined man.

The opinion of all the commercial men was that, under the reverses which
had successively weighed down Morrel, it was impossible for him to
remain solvent. Great, therefore, was the astonishment when at the end
of the month, he cancelled all his obligations with his usual
punctuality. Still confidence was not restored to all minds, and the
general opinion was that the complete ruin of the unfortunate shipowner
had been postponed only until the end of the month.

The month passed, and Morrel made extraordinary efforts to get in all
his resources. Formerly his paper, at any date, was taken with
confidence, and was even in request. Morrel now tried to negotiate bills
at ninety days only, and none of the banks would give him credit.
Fortunately, Morrel had some funds coming in on which he could rely;
and, as they reached him, he found himself in a condition to meet his
engagements when the end of July came.

The agent of Thomson & French had not been again seen at Marseilles; the
day after, or two days after his visit to Morrel, he had disappeared;
and as in that city he had had no intercourse but with the mayor, the
inspector of prisons, and M. Morrel, his departure left no trace except
in the memories of these three persons. As to the sailors of the
Pharaon, they must have found snug berths elsewhere, for they also had
disappeared.

Captain Gaumard, recovered from his illness, had returned from Palma. He
delayed presenting himself at Morrel’s, but the owner, hearing of his
arrival, went to see him. The worthy shipowner knew, from Penelon’s
recital, of the captain’s brave conduct during the storm, and tried to
console him. He brought him also the amount of his wages, which Captain
Gaumard had not dared to apply for.

As he descended the staircase, Morrel met Penelon, who was going up.
Penelon had, it would seem, made good use of his money, for he was newly
clad. When he saw his employer, the worthy tar seemed much embarrassed,
drew on one side into the corner of the landing-place, passed his quid
from one cheek to the other, stared stupidly with his great eyes, and
only acknowledged the squeeze of the hand which Morrel as usual gave him
by a slight pressure in return. Morrel attributed Penelon’s
embarrassment to the elegance of his attire; it was evident the good
fellow had not gone to such an expense on his own account; he was, no
doubt, engaged on board some other vessel, and thus his bashfulness
arose from the fact of his not having, if we may so express ourselves,
worn mourning for the Pharaon longer. Perhaps he had come to tell
Captain Gaumard of his good luck, and to offer him employment from his
new master.

“Worthy fellows!” said Morrel, as he went away, “may your new master
love you as I loved you, and be more fortunate than I have been!”

August rolled by in unceasing efforts on the part of Morrel to renew his
credit or revive the old. On the 20th of August it was known at
Marseilles that he had left town in the mailcoach, and then it was said
that the bills would go to protest at the end of the month, and that
Morrel had gone away and left his chief clerk Emmanuel, and his cashier
Cocles, to meet the creditors. But, contrary to all expectation, when
the 31st of August came, the house opened as usual, and Cocles appeared
behind the grating of the counter, examined all bills presented with the
usual scrutiny, and, from first to last, paid all with the usual
precision. There came in, moreover, two drafts which M. Morrel had fully
anticipated, and which Cocles paid as punctually as the bills which the
shipowner had accepted. All this was incomprehensible, and then, with
the tenacity peculiar to prophets of bad news, the failure was put off
until the end of September.

On the 1st, Morrel returned; he was awaited by his family with extreme
anxiety, for from this journey to Paris they hoped great things. Morrel
had thought of Danglars, who was now immensely rich, and had lain under
great obligations to Morrel in former days, since to him it was owing
that Danglars entered the service of the Spanish banker, with whom he
had laid the foundations of his vast wealth. It was said at this moment
that Danglars was worth from six to eight millions of francs, and had
unlimited credit. Danglars, then, without taking a crown from his
pocket, could save Morrel; he had but to pass his word for a loan, and
Morrel was saved. Morrel had long thought of Danglars, but had kept away
from some instinctive motive, and had delayed as long as possible
availing himself of this last resource. And Morrel was right, for he
returned home crushed by the humiliation of a refusal.

Yet, on his arrival, Morrel did not utter a complaint, or say one harsh
word. He embraced his weeping wife and daughter, pressed Emmanuel’s hand
with friendly warmth, and then going to his private room on the second
floor had sent for Cocles.

It was agreed in a brief council held among them, that Julie should
write to her brother, who was in garrison at Nîmes, to come to them as
speedily as possible. The poor women felt instinctively that they
required all their strength to support the blow that impended. Besides,
Maximilian Morrel, though hardly two-and-twenty, had great influence
over his father.

He was a strong-minded, upright young man. At the time when he decided
on his profession his father had no desire to choose for him, but had
consulted young Maximilian’s taste. He had at once declared for a
military life, and had in consequence studied hard, passed brilliantly
through the Polytechnic School, and left it as sub-lieutenant of the
53rd of the line. For a year he had held this rank, and expected
promotion on the first vacancy. In his regiment Maximilian Morrel was
noted for his rigid observance, not only of the obligations imposed on a
soldier, but also of the duties of a man; and he thus gained the name of
“the stoic.” We need hardly say that many of those who gave him this
epithet repeated it because they had heard it, and did not even know
what it meant.

This was the young man whom his mother and sister called to their aid to
sustain them under the serious trial which they felt they would soon
have to endure. They had not mistaken the gravity of this event, for the
moment after Morrel had entered his private office with Cocles, Julie
saw the latter leave it pale, trembling, and his features betraying the
utmost consternation. She would have questioned him as he passed by her,
but the worthy creature hastened down the staircase with unusual
precipitation, and only raised his hands to heaven and exclaimed:

Morrel examined the ledgers, opened the portfolio, and counted the
money. All his funds amounted to 6,000 or 8,000 francs, his bills
receivable up to the 5th to 4,000 or 5,000, which, making the best of
everything, gave him 14,000 francs to meet debts amounting to 287,500
francs. He had not even the means for making a possible settlement on
account.

However, when Morrel went down to his dinner, he appeared very calm.
This calmness was more alarming to the two women than the deepest
dejection would have been. After dinner Morrel usually went out and used
to take his coffee at the club of the Phocéens, and read the Semaphore;
this day he did not leave the house, but returned to his office.

As to Cocles, he seemed completely bewildered. For part of the day he
went into the courtyard, seated himself on a stone with his head bare
and exposed to the blazing sun. Emmanuel tried to comfort the women, but
his eloquence faltered. The young man was too well acquainted with the
business of the house, not to feel that a great catastrophe hung over
the Morrel family. Night came, the two women had watched, hoping that
when he left his room Morrel would come to them, but they heard him pass
before their door, and trying to conceal the noise of his footsteps.
They listened; he went into his sleeping-room, and fastened the door
inside. Madame Morrel sent her daughter to bed, and half an hour after
Julie had retired, she rose, took off her shoes, and went stealthily
along the passage, to see through the keyhole what her husband was
doing.

In the passage she saw a retreating shadow; it was Julie, who, uneasy
herself, had anticipated her mother. The young lady went towards Madame
Morrel.

They had understood each other without speaking. Madame Morrel looked
again through the keyhole, Morrel was writing; but Madame Morrel
remarked, what her daughter had not observed, that her husband was
writing on stamped paper. The terrible idea that he was writing his will
flashed across her; she shuddered, and yet had not strength to utter a
word.

Next day M. Morrel seemed as calm as ever, went into his office as
usual, came to his breakfast punctually, and then, after dinner, he
placed his daughter beside him, took her head in his arms, and held her
for a long time against his bosom. In the evening, Julie told her
mother, that although he was apparently so calm, she had noticed that
her father’s heart beat violently.

The next two days passed in much the same way. On the evening of the 4th
of September, M. Morrel asked his daughter for the key of his study.
Julie trembled at this request, which seemed to her of bad omen. Why did
her father ask for this key which she always kept, and which was only
taken from her in childhood as a punishment? The young girl looked at
Morrel.

During the night, between the 4th and 5th of September, Madame Morrel
remained listening for every sound, and, until three o’clock in the
morning, she heard her husband pacing the room in great agitation. It
was three o’clock when he threw himself on the bed. The mother and
daughter passed the night together. They had expected Maximilian since
the previous evening. At eight o’clock in the morning Morrel entered
their chamber. He was calm; but the agitation of the night was legible
in his pale and careworn visage. They did not dare to ask him how he had
slept. Morrel was kinder to his wife, more affectionate to his daughter,
than he had ever been. He could not cease gazing at and kissing the
sweet girl. Julie, mindful of Emmanuel’s request, was following her
father when he quitted the room, but he said to her quickly:

This was the first time Morrel had ever so spoken, but he said it in a
tone of paternal kindness, and Julie did not dare to disobey. She
remained at the same spot standing mute and motionless. An instant
afterwards the door opened, she felt two arms encircle her, and a mouth
pressed her forehead. She looked up and uttered an exclamation of joy.

At these words Madame Morrel rose, and threw herself into her son’s
arms.

“Mother,” said the young man, looking alternately at Madame Morrel and
her daughter, “what has occurred—what has happened? Your letter has
frightened me, and I have come hither with all speed.”

“Julie,” said Madame Morrel, making a sign to the young man, “go and
tell your father that Maximilian has just arrived.”

“Are you not Mademoiselle Julie Morrel?” inquired the man, with a strong
Italian accent.

During this time, Madame Morrel had told her son everything. The young
man knew quite well that, after the succession of misfortunes which had
befallen his father, great changes had taken place in the style of
living and housekeeping; but he did not know that matters had reached
such a point. He was thunderstruck. Then, rushing hastily out of the
apartment, he ran upstairs, expecting to find his father in his study,
but he rapped there in vain.

While he was yet at the door of the study he heard the bedroom door
open, turned, and saw his father. Instead of going direct to his study,
M. Morrel had returned to his bedchamber, which he was only this moment
quitting. Morrel uttered a cry of surprise at the sight of his son, of
whose arrival he was ignorant. He remained motionless on the spot,
pressing with his left hand something he had concealed under his coat.
Maximilian sprang down the staircase, and threw his arms round his
father’s neck; but suddenly he recoiled, and placed his right hand on
Morrel’s breast.

“Oh, this is what I feared!” said Morrel.

“Maximilian,” replied Morrel, looking fixedly at his son, “you are a
man, and a man of honor. Come, and I will explain to you.”

And with a firm step Morrel went up to his study, while Maximilian
followed him, trembling as he went. Morrel opened the door, and closed
it behind his son; then, crossing the anteroom, went to his desk on
which he placed the pistols, and pointed with his finger to an open
ledger. In this ledger was made out an exact balance-sheet of his
affairs. Morrel had to pay, within half an hour, 287,500 francs. All he
possessed was 15,257 francs.

“Read!” said Morrel.

The young man was overwhelmed as he read. Morrel said not a word. What
could he say? What need he add to such a desperate proof in figures?

“I have,” replied Morrel.

“Blood washes out dishonor,” said Morrel.

Morrel caught his hand. “Your mother—your sister! Who will support
them?”

“Yes, I do so bid you,” answered Morrel, “it is your duty. You have a
calm, strong mind, Maximilian. Maximilian, you are no ordinary man. I
make no requests or commands; I only ask you to examine my position as
if it were your own, and then judge for yourself.”

“Be it so, then, my father,” he said, extending his hand to Morrel, “die
in peace, my father; I will live.”

Morrel was about to cast himself on his knees before his son, but
Maximilian caught him in his arms, and those two noble hearts were
pressed against each other for a moment.

“You know it is not my fault,” said Morrel.

“My father,” said the young man, bending his knee, “bless me!” Morrel
took the head of his son between his two hands, drew him forward, and
kissing his forehead several times said:

“And now,” said Morrel, “leave me alone, and endeavor to keep your
mother and sister away.”

“Will you not see my sister once more?” asked Maximilian. A last but
final hope was concealed by the young man in the effect of this
interview, and therefore he had suggested it. Morrel shook his head. “I
saw her this morning, and bade her adieu.”

“And now, once more, adieu,” said Morrel. “Go, leave me; I would be
alone. You will find my will in the secretaire in my bedroom.”

And he rushed out of the study. When his son had left him, Morrel
remained an instant standing with his eyes fixed on the door; then
putting forth his arm, he pulled the bell. After a moment’s interval,
Cocles appeared.

It was no longer the same man—the fearful revelations of the three last
days had crushed him. This thought—the house of Morrel is about to stop
payment—bent him to the earth more than twenty years would otherwise
have done.

“My worthy Cocles,” said Morrel in a tone impossible to describe, “do
you remain in the antechamber. When the gentleman who came three months
ago—the agent of Thomson & French—arrives, announce his arrival to me.”

Cocles made no reply; he made a sign with his head, went into the
anteroom, and seated himself. Morrel fell back in his chair, his eyes
fixed on the clock; there were seven minutes left, that was all. The
hand moved on with incredible rapidity, he seemed to see its motion.

He took up the deadly weapon again, his lips parted and his eyes fixed
on the clock, and then shuddered at the click of the trigger as he
cocked the pistol. At this moment of mortal anguish the cold sweat came
forth upon his brow, a pang stronger than death clutched at his heart-
strings. He heard the door of the staircase creak on its hinges—the
clock gave its warning to strike eleven—the door of his study opened.
Morrel did not turn round—he expected these words of Cocles, “The agent
of Thomson & French.”

“Saved, my child!” said Morrel; “what do you mean?”

Morrel took the purse, and started as he did so, for a vague remembrance
reminded him that it once belonged to himself. At one end was the
receipted bill for the 287,000 francs, and at the other was a diamond as
large as a hazel-nut, with these words on a small slip of parchment:
Julie’s Dowry.

Morrel passed his hand over his brow; it seemed to him a dream. At this
moment the clock struck eleven. He felt as if each stroke of the hammer
fell upon his heart.

“But,” cried Morrel, “this purse is not yours!” Julie handed to her
father the letter she had received in the morning.

“And did you go alone?” asked Morrel, after he had read it.

“Monsieur Morrel!” exclaimed a voice on the stairs; “Monsieur Morrel!”

Morrel fell back in his chair, his strength was failing him; his
understanding weakened by such events, refused to comprehend such
incredible, unheard-of, fabulous facts. But his son came in.

“My dear friends,” said Morrel, “if this be so, it must be a miracle of
heaven! Impossible, impossible!”

“Come, dear ones,” said Morrel, rising from his seat, “let us go and
see, and Heaven have pity upon us if it be false intelligence!”

They all went out, and on the stairs met Madame Morrel, who had been
afraid to go up into the study. In a moment they were at the Canebière.
There was a crowd on the pier. All the crowd gave way before Morrel.
“The Pharaon! the Pharaon!” said every voice.

And, wonderful to see, in front of the tower of Saint-Jean, was a ship
bearing on her stern these words, printed in white letters, “The
Pharaon, Morrel & Son, of Marseilles.” She was the exact duplicate of
the other Pharaon, and loaded, as that had been, with cochineal and
indigo. She cast anchor, clued up sails, and on the deck was Captain
Gaumard giving orders, and good old Penelon making signals to M. Morrel.
To doubt any longer was impossible; there was the evidence of the
senses, and ten thousand persons who came to corroborate the testimony.

As Morrel and his son embraced on the pier-head, in the presence and
amid the applause of the whole city witnessing this event, a man, with
his face half-covered by a black beard, and who, concealed behind the
sentry-box, watched the scene with delight, uttered these words in a low
tone:

Then a launch came to shore, took him on board, and conveyed him to a
yacht splendidly fitted up, on whose deck he sprung with the activity of
a sailor; thence he once again looked towards Morrel, who, weeping with
joy, was shaking hands most cordially with all the crowd around him, and
thanking with a look the unknown benefactor whom he seemed to be seeking
in the skies.

“M. de Château-Renaud—M. Maximilian Morrel,” said the servant,
announcing two fresh guests.

“Morrel,” muttered Albert—“Morrel—who is he?”

“My dear Albert,” said he, “let me introduce to you M. Maximilian
Morrel, captain of Spahis, my friend; and what is more—however the man
speaks for himself—my preserver. Salute my hero, viscount.”

“Oh, nothing worth speaking of,” said Morrel; “M. de Château-Renaud
exaggerates.”

“Not worth speaking of?” cried Château-Renaud; “life is not worth
speaking of!—that is rather too philosophical, on my word, Morrel. It is
very well for you, who risk your life every day, but for me, who only
did so once——”

“We gather from all this, baron, that Captain Morrel saved your life.”

“Yes,” said Morrel, smiling, “it was the 5th of September, the
anniversary of the day on which my father was miraculously preserved;
therefore, as far as it lies in my power, I endeavor to celebrate it by
some——”

“I divined that you would become mine, count,” replied Morrel; “besides,
as I had the honor to tell you, heroism or not, sacrifice or not, that
day I owed an offering to bad fortune in recompense for the favors good
fortune had on other days granted to us.”

“The history to which M. Morrel alludes,” continued Château-Renaud, “is
an admirable one, which he will tell you some day when you are better
acquainted with him; today let us fill our stomachs, and not our
memories. What time do you breakfast, Albert?”

“And I also,” said Morrel thoughtfully, “have heard something like this
from an old sailor named Penelon.”

“Ah,” cried Albert, “it is very lucky that M. Morrel comes to aid me;
you are vexed, are you not, that he thus gives a clew to the labyrinth?”

“My dear count,” replied Albert, “I was announcing your visit to some of
my friends, whom I had invited in consequence of the promise you did me
the honor to make, and whom I now present to you. They are the Count of
Château-Renaud, whose nobility goes back to the twelve peers, and whose
ancestors had a place at the Round Table; M. Lucien Debray, private
secretary to the minister of the interior; M. Beauchamp, an editor of a
paper, and the terror of the French government, but of whom, in spite of
his national celebrity, you perhaps have not heard in Italy, since his
paper is prohibited there; and M. Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis.”

“Oh, M. de Morcerf,” interrupted Morrel.

This exclamation, which corresponded to the count’s own thought rather
than to what Albert was saying, surprised everybody, and especially
Morrel, who looked at Monte Cristo with wonder. But, at the same time,
the intonation was so soft that, however strange the speech might seem,
it was impossible to be offended at it.

“In reality,” replied the latter, who, with his aristocratic glance and
his knowledge of the world, had penetrated at once all that was
penetrable in Monte Cristo, “Albert has not deceived us, for the count
is a most singular being. What say you, Morrel!”

“But you can sleep when you please, monsieur?” said Morrel.

“It is frank, at least,” said Morrel. “But I am sure that the count does
not regret having once deviated from the principles he has so boldly
avowed.”

“How have I deviated from those principles, monsieur?” asked Monte
Cristo, who could not help looking at Morrel with so much intensity,
that two or three times the young man had been unable to sustain that
clear and piercing glance.

“Why, it seems to me,” replied Morrel, “that in delivering M. de
Morcerf, whom you did not know, you did good to your neighbor and to
society.”

“I do not know him,” returned Monte Cristo; “but I shall probably soon
make his acquaintance, for I have a credit opened with him by the house
of Richard & Blount, of London, Arstein & Eskeles of Vienna, and Thomson
& French at Rome.” As he pronounced the two last names, the count
glanced at Maximilian Morrel. If the stranger expected to produce an
effect on Morrel, he was not mistaken—Maximilian started as if he had
been electrified.

“You have no idea, then, Morrel?” asked Château-Renaud; “you do not
propose anything.”

“Oh, no,” said Morrel; “my sister is five-and-twenty, my brother-in-law
is thirty, they are gay, young, and happy. Besides, the count will be in
his own house, and only see them when he thinks fit to do so.”

“He is more than that,” replied Château-Renaud; “he is one of the most
extraordinary men I ever saw in my life. Are you coming, Morrel?”

And Maximilian Morrel left the room with the Baron de Château-Renaud,
leaving Monte Cristo alone with Morcerf.

Monte Cristo, thus attuned to the interview he proposed to hold with
Morrel and his family, departed, murmuring as he went these lines of
Pindar, “Youth is a flower of which love is the fruit; happy is he who,
after having watched its silent growth, is permitted to gather and call
it his own.” The carriage was prepared according to orders, and stepping
lightly into it, the count drove off at his usual rapid pace.

Chapter 50. The Morrel Family

Cocles opened the gate, and Baptistin, springing from the box, inquired
whether Monsieur and Madame Herbault and Monsieur Maximilian Morrel
would see his excellency the Count of Monte Cristo.

“The Count of Monte Cristo?” cried Morrel, throwing away his cigar and
hastening to the carriage; “I should think we would see him. Ah, a
thousand thanks, count, for not having forgotten your promise.”

“I am sorry to see,” observed Monte Cristo to Morrel, “that I cause no
small disturbance in your house.”

“He was a merchant, monsieur, and had succeeded to the business of my
poor father. M. Morrel, at his death, left 500,000 francs, which were
divided between my sister and myself, for we were his only children. Her
husband, who, when he married her, had no other patrimony than his noble
probity, his first-rate ability, and his spotless reputation, wished to
possess as much as his wife. He labored and toiled until he had amassed
250,000 francs; six years sufficed to achieve this object. Oh, I assure
you, sir, it was a touching spectacle to see these young creatures,
destined by their talents for higher stations, toiling together, and
through their unwillingness to change any of the customs of their
paternal house, taking six years to accomplish what less scrupulous
people would have effected in two or three. Marseilles resounded with
their well-earned praises. At last, one day, Emmanuel came to his wife,
who had just finished making up the accounts.

“‘Emmanuel,’ returned my sister, ‘the house of Morrel can only be
carried on by a Morrel. Is it not worth 300,000 francs to save our
father’s name from the chances of evil fortune and failure?’

Monte Cristo started. “What did your father tell you, M. Morrel?” said
he eagerly.

“‘Morrel, Morrel,’ cried my father, ‘stop a bit;’ then knitting his
brows into a deep frown, he added, ‘surely this cannot be one of the
Morrel family who lived at Marseilles, and gave us so much trouble from
their violent Bonapartism—I mean about the year 1815.’

“Oh, I have often heard whispers of things that seem to me most
strange—the father a Bonapartist, the son a Royalist; what can have been
the reason of so singular a difference in parties and politics? But to
resume my story; I turned towards my grandfather, as though to question
him as to the cause of his emotion; he looked expressively at the
newspaper I had been reading. ‘What is the matter, dear grandfather?’
said I, ‘are you pleased?’ He gave me a sign in the affirmative. ‘With
what my father said just now?’ He returned a sign in the negative.
‘Perhaps you liked what M. Danglars said?’ Another sign in the negative.
‘Oh, then, you were glad to hear that M. Morrel (I didn’t dare to say
Maximilian) had been made an officer of the Legion of Honor?’ He
signified assent; only think of the poor old man’s being so pleased to
think that you, who were a perfect stranger to him, had been made an
officer of the Legion of Honor! Perhaps it was a mere whim on his part,
for he is falling, they say, into second childhood, but I love him for
showing so much interest in you.”

“There go two miscreants;” said he, “it is a pity they are not really
related!” Then, after an instant of gloomy reflection, “Come, I will go
to see the Morrels,” said he; “I think that disgust is even more
sickening than hatred.”

“Well, Valentine,” said Morrel with a sigh, “we will not discuss the
matter further. I will not make a confidant of him.”

“Yes, since you have known me,” said Morrel, smiling; “but that cannot
apply to the time previous to our acquaintance, Valentine.”

“Good,” said Monte Cristo to Morrel, who was at his house when the news
arrived of the strange reverse of fortune of which Danglars had been the
victim, “I have just made a discovery for twenty-five thousand francs,
for which I would have paid a hundred thousand.”

“What have you discovered?” asked Morrel.

At precisely six o’clock the clatter of horses’ hoofs was heard at the
entrance door; it was our captain of Spahis, who had arrived on Médéah.
“I am sure I am the first,” cried Morrel; “I did it on purpose to have
you a minute to myself, before everyone came. Julie and Emmanuel have a
thousand things to tell you. Ah, really this is magnificent! But tell
me, count, will your people take care of my horse?”

“Do you regret them?” asked Morrel, with his open laugh.

Madame Danglars threw a rapid and inquiring glance which could only be
interpreted by Monte Cristo, around the courtyard, over the peristyle,
and across the front of the house, then, repressing a slight emotion,
which must have been seen on her countenance if she had not kept her
color, she ascended the steps, saying to Morrel:

Morrel smiled with an expression very like a grimace, and then turned
round to Monte Cristo, as if to ask him to extricate him from his
embarrassment. The count understood him.

“With you, sir,” replied the baroness, “one can wish for nothing, one is
so sure to obtain it. If it were so with M. Morrel——”

“Unfortunately,” replied the count, “I am witness that M. Morrel cannot
give up his horse, his honor being engaged in keeping it.”

“You see my position, madame,” said Morrel, bestowing a grateful smile
on Monte Cristo.

“A fine name,” said Morrel.

“No; you see plainly he is not dead. Instead of striking between the
sixth and seventh left ribs, as your countrymen do, you must have struck
higher or lower, and life is very tenacious in these lawyers, or rather
there is no truth in anything you have told me—it was a fright of the
imagination, a dream of your fancy. You went to sleep full of thoughts
of vengeance; they weighed heavily upon your stomach; you had the
nightmare—that’s all. Come, calm yourself, and reckon them up—M. and
Madame de Villefort, two; M. and Madame Danglars, four; M. de Château-
Renaud, M. Debray, M. Morrel, seven; Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti,
eight.”

M. de Villefort had on the right hand Madame Danglars, on his left
Morrel. The count was seated between Madame de Villefort and Danglars;
the other seats were filled by Debray, who was placed between the two
Cavalcanti, and by Château-Renaud, seated between Madame de Villefort
and Morrel.

“Gentlemen,” he said, “you will admit that, when arrived at a certain
degree of fortune, the superfluities of life are all that can be
desired; and the ladies will allow that, after having risen to a certain
eminence of position, the ideal alone can be more exalted. Now, to
follow out this reasoning, what is the marvellous?—that which we do not
understand. What is it that we really desire?—that which we cannot
obtain. Now, to see things which I cannot understand, to procure
impossibilities, these are the study of my life. I gratify my wishes by
two means—my will and my money. I take as much interest in the pursuit
of some whim as you do, M. Danglars, in promoting a new railway line;
you, M. de Villefort, in condemning a culprit to death; you, M. Debray,
in pacifying a kingdom; you, M. de Château-Renaud, in pleasing a woman;
and you, Morrel, in breaking a horse that no one can ride. For example,
you see these two fish; one brought from fifty leagues beyond St.
Petersburg, the other five leagues from Naples. Is it not amusing to see
them both on the same table?”

“In four days,” said Morrel; “it is extraordinary!”

It was Morrel’s turn to become pale.

Ever since Valentine’s dowry had been mentioned, Morrel had been silent
and sad.

The evening passed on; Madame de Villefort expressed a desire to return
to Paris, which Madame Danglars had not dared to do, notwithstanding the
uneasiness she experienced. On his wife’s request, M. de Villefort was
the first to give the signal of departure. He offered a seat in his
landau to Madame Danglars, that she might be under the care of his wife.
As for M. Danglars, absorbed in an interesting conversation with M.
Cavalcanti, he paid no attention to anything that was passing. While
Monte Cristo had begged the smelling-bottle of Madame de Villefort, he
had noticed the approach of Villefort to Madame Danglars, and he soon
guessed all that had passed between them, though the words had been
uttered in so low a voice as hardly to be heard by Madame Danglars.
Without opposing their arrangements, he allowed Morrel, Château-Renaud,
and Debray to leave on horseback, and the ladies in M. de Villefort’s
carriage. Danglars, more and more delighted with Major Cavalcanti, had
offered him a seat in his carriage. Andrea Cavalcanti found his tilbury
waiting at the door; the groom, in every respect a caricature of the
English fashion, was standing on tiptoe to hold a large iron-gray horse.

At the Place Louis XV. the three young people separated—that is to say,
Morrel went to the Boulevards, Château-Renaud to the Pont de la
Révolution, and Debray to the Quai. Most probably Morrel and Château-
Renaud returned to their “domestic hearths,” as they say in the gallery
of the Chamber in well-turned speeches, and in the theatre of the Rue
Richelieu in well-written pieces; but it was not the case with Debray.
When he reached the wicket of the Louvre, he turned to the left,
galloped across the Carrousel, passed through the Rue Saint-Roch, and,
issuing from the Rue de la Michodière, he arrived at M. Danglars’ door
just at the same time that Villefort’s landau, after having deposited
him and his wife at the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, stopped to leave the
baroness at her own house.

“Yes, with Count Cavalcanti, the marquis his father, Madame Danglars, M.
and Madame de Villefort,—charming people,—M. Debray, Maximilian Morrel,
and M. de Château-Renaud.”

“Madame,” said Albert, “allow me to present to you M. Maximilian Morrel,
captain of Spahis, one of our best, and, above all, of our bravest
officers.”

This answer, and especially the tone in which it was uttered, chilled
the heart of poor Morrel. But a recompense was in store for him; turning
around, he saw near the door a beautiful fair face, whose large blue
eyes were, without any marked expression, fixed upon him, while the
bouquet of myosotis was gently raised to her lips.

The salutation was so well understood that Morrel, with the same
expression in his eyes, placed his handkerchief to his mouth; and these
two living statues, whose hearts beat so violently under their marble
aspect, separated from each other by the whole length of the room,
forgot themselves for a moment, or rather forgot the world in their
mutual contemplation. They might have remained much longer lost in one
another, without anyone noticing their abstraction. The Count of Monte
Cristo had just entered.

They re-entered the drawing-room, which Valentine and Madame de
Villefort had just quitted. It is perhaps needless to add that Morrel
departed almost at the same time.

More than once she thought of revealing all to her grandmother, and she
would not have hesitated a moment, if Maximilian Morrel had been named
Albert de Morcerf or Raoul de Château-Renaud; but Morrel was of plebeian
extraction, and Valentine knew how the haughty Marquise de Saint-Méran
despised all who were not noble. Her secret had each time been repressed
when she was about to reveal it, by the sad conviction that it would be
useless to do so; for, were it once discovered by her father and mother,
all would be lost.

It was indeed Maximilian Morrel, who had passed a wretched existence
since the previous day. With the instinct peculiar to lovers he had
anticipated after the return of Madame de Saint-Méran and the death of
the marquis, that something would occur at M. de Villefort’s in
connection with his attachment for Valentine. His presentiments were
realized, as we shall see, and his uneasy forebodings had goaded him
pale and trembling to the gate under the chestnut-trees.

Valentine was ignorant of the cause of this sorrow and anxiety, and as
it was not his accustomed hour for visiting her, she had gone to the
spot simply by accident or perhaps through sympathy. Morrel called her,
and she ran to the gate.

“Yes, my poor girl,” replied Morrel; “I come to bring and to hear bad
tidings.”

“Dear Valentine,” said Morrel, endeavoring to conceal his own emotion,
“listen, I entreat you; what I am about to say is very serious. When are
you to be married?”

“I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since,” said Morrel; “we
were speaking, he of the sorrow your family had experienced, and I of
your grief, when a carriage rolled into the courtyard. Never, till then,
had I placed any confidence in presentiments, but now I cannot help
believing them, Valentine. At the sound of that carriage I shuddered;
soon I heard steps on the staircase, which terrified me as much as the
footsteps of the commander did Don Juan. The door at last opened; Albert
de Morcerf entered first, and I began to hope my fears were vain, when,
after him, another young man advanced, and the count exclaimed: ‘Ah,
here is the Baron Franz d’Épinay!’ I summoned all my strength and
courage to my support. Perhaps I turned pale and trembled, but certainly
I smiled; and five minutes after I left, without having heard one word
that had passed.”

“Listen,” said Morrel; “it is not the first time you have contemplated
our present position, which is a serious and urgent one; I do not think
it is a moment to give way to useless sorrow; leave that for those who
like to suffer at their leisure and indulge their grief in secret. There
are such in the world, and God will doubtless reward them in heaven for
their resignation on earth, but those who mean to contend must not lose
one precious moment, but must return immediately the blow which fortune
strikes. Do you intend to struggle against our ill-fortune? Tell me,
Valentine for it is that I came to know.”

Morrel started.

“You are right,” said Morrel, calmly.

“Do not appeal to me, mademoiselle; I shall be a bad judge in such a
case; my selfishness will blind me,” replied Morrel, whose low voice and
clenched hands announced his growing desperation.

“Valentine,” said Morrel pushing aside a loose plank, “give me your hand
in token of forgiveness of my anger; my senses are confused, and during
the last hour the most extravagant thoughts have passed through my
brain. Oh, if you refuse my advice——”

“Follow me,” said Morrel; “I will take you to my sister, who is worthy
also to be yours. We will embark for Algiers, for England, for America,
or, if you prefer it, retire to the country and only return to Paris
when our friends have reconciled your family.”

“I feared it, Maximilian,” said she; “it is the counsel of a madman, and
I should be more mad than you, did I not stop you at once with the word
‘Impossible, Morrel, impossible!’”

“You will then submit to what fate decrees for you without even
attempting to contend with it?” said Morrel sorrowfully.

“Mademoiselle,” replied Morrel with a bitter smile, “I am selfish—you
have already said so—and as a selfish man I think not of what others
would do in my situation, but of what I intend doing myself. I think
only that I have known you not a whole year. From the day I first saw
you, all my hopes of happiness have been in securing your affection. One
day you acknowledged that you loved me, and since that day my hope of
future happiness has rested on obtaining you, for to gain you would be
life to me. Now, I think no more; I say only that fortune has turned
against me—I had thought to gain heaven, and now I have lost it. It is
an every-day occurrence for a gambler to lose not only what he possesses
but also what he has not.”

Morrel pronounced these words with perfect calmness; Valentine looked at
him a moment with her large, scrutinizing eyes, endeavoring not to let
Morrel discover the grief which struggled in her heart.

“Adieu, Valentine, adieu!” said Morrel, bowing.

Valentine shook the gate with a strength of which she could not have
been supposed to be possessed, as Morrel was going away, and passing
both her hands through the opening, she clasped and wrung them. “I must
know what you mean to do!” said she. “Where are you going?”

“Adieu, Valentine,” repeated Morrel.

Morrel, who had already gone some few steps away, again returned, and
pale with joy extended both hands towards Valentine through the opening.

“We will wait, then,” said Morrel.

“I rely on you, Valentine,” said Morrel; “all you do will be well done;
only if they disregard your prayers, if your father and Madame de Saint-
Méran insist that M. d’Épinay should be called tomorrow to sign the
contract——”

Valentine had approached, or rather, had placed her lips so near the
fence, that they nearly touched those of Morrel, which were pressed
against the other side of the cold and inexorable barrier.

The sound of a kiss was heard, and Valentine fled through the avenue.
Morrel listened to catch the last sound of her dress brushing the
branches, and of her footstep on the gravel, then raised his eyes with
an ineffable smile of thankfulness to heaven for being permitted to be
thus loved, and then also disappeared.

“P.S.—My poor grandmother gets worse and worse; yesterday her fever
amounted to delirium; today her delirium is almost madness. You will be
very kind to me, will you not, Morrel, to make me forget my sorrow in
leaving her thus? I think it is kept a secret from grandpapa Noirtier,
that the contract is to be signed this evening.”

Morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news that the contract
was to be signed that evening. Then he went to call on Monte Cristo and
heard still more. Franz had been to announce the ceremony, and Madame de
Villefort had also written to beg the count to excuse her not inviting
him; the death of M. de Saint-Méran and the dangerous illness of his
widow would cast a gloom over the meeting which she would regret should
be shared by the count whom she wished every happiness.

It is easy to suppose that Morrel’s agitation would not escape the
count’s penetrating eye. Monte Cristo was more affectionate than
ever,—indeed, his manner was so kind that several times Morrel was on
the point of telling him all. But he recalled the promise he had made to
Valentine, and kept his secret.

Morrel longed intensely for the moment when he should hear Valentine
say, “Here I am, Maximilian; come and help me.” He had arranged
everything for her escape; two ladders were hidden in the clover-field;
a cabriolet was ordered for Maximilian alone, without a servant, without
lights; at the turning of the first street they would light the lamps,
as it would be foolish to attract the notice of the police by too many
precautions. Occasionally he shuddered; he thought of the moment when,
from the top of that wall, he should protect the descent of his dear
Valentine, pressing in his arms for the first time her of whom he had
yet only kissed the delicate hand.

At length the hour drew near. Never did a man deeply in love allow the
clocks to go on peacefully. Morrel tormented his so effectually that
they struck eight at half-past six. He then said, “It is time to start;
the signature was indeed fixed to take place at nine o’clock, but
perhaps Valentine will not wait for that.” Consequently, Morrel, having
left the Rue Meslay at half-past eight by his timepiece, entered the
clover-field while the clock of Saint-Philippe-du-Roule was striking
eight. The horse and cabriolet were concealed behind a small ruin, where
Morrel had often waited.

The night gradually drew on, and the foliage in the garden assumed a
deeper hue. Then Morrel came out from his hiding-place with a beating
heart, and looked through the small opening in the gate; there was yet
no one to be seen.

The clock struck half-past eight, and still another half-hour was passed
in waiting, while Morrel walked to and fro, and gazed more and more
frequently through the opening. The garden became darker still, but in
the darkness he looked in vain for the white dress, and in the silence
he vainly listened for the sound of footsteps. The house, which was
discernible through the trees, remained in darkness, and gave no
indication that so important an event as the signature of a marriage-
contract was going on. Morrel looked at his watch, which wanted a
quarter to ten; but soon the same clock he had already heard strike two
or three times rectified the error by striking half-past nine.

Then Morrel saw that he had been right in believing that the house was
not illuminated. Instead of lights at every window, as is customary on
days of ceremony, he saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a
cloud, which at that moment obscured the moon’s feeble light. A light
moved rapidly from time to time past three windows of the second floor.
These three windows were in Madame de Saint-Méran’s room. Another
remained motionless behind some red curtains which were in Madame de
Villefort’s bedroom. Morrel guessed all this. So many times, in order to
follow Valentine in thought at every hour in the day, had he made her
describe the whole house, that without having seen it he knew it all.

This darkness and silence alarmed Morrel still more than Valentine’s
absence had done. Almost mad with grief, and determined to venture
everything in order to see Valentine once more, and be certain of the
misfortune he feared, Morrel gained the edge of the clump of trees, and
was going to pass as quickly as possible through the flower-garden, when
the sound of a voice, still at some distance, but which was borne upon
the wind, reached him. At this sound, as he was already partially
exposed to view, he stepped back and concealed himself completely,
remaining perfectly motionless.

The moon had just then escaped from behind the cloud which had concealed
it, and Morrel saw Villefort come out upon the steps, followed by a
gentleman in black. They descended, and advanced towards the clump of
trees, and Morrel soon recognized the other gentleman as Doctor
d’Avrigny.

Villefort fell, rather than seated himself. The doctor stood before him,
with one hand placed on his shoulder. Morrel, horrified, supported his
head with one hand, and with the other pressed his heart, lest its
beatings should be heard. “Dead, dead!” repeated he within himself; and
he felt as if he were also dying.

“Madame de Saint-Méran was, doubtless, advancing in years, but she
enjoyed excellent health.” Morrel began again to breathe freely, which
he had not done during the last ten minutes.

M. de Villefort started from his seat, then in a moment fell down again,
silent and motionless. Morrel knew not if he were dreaming or awake.

When they were gone, Morrel ventured out from under the trees, and the
moon shone upon his face, which was so pale it might have been taken for
that of a ghost.

As he thought thus, he looked alternately at the window with red
curtains and the three windows with white curtains. The light had almost
disappeared from the former; doubtless Madame de Villefort had just put
out her lamp, and the nightlamp alone reflected its dull light on the
window. At the extremity of the building, on the contrary, he saw one of
the three windows open. A wax-light placed on the mantle-piece threw
some of its pale rays without, and a shadow was seen for one moment on
the balcony. Morrel shuddered; he thought he heard a sob.

Meanwhile, Morrel had traversed the anteroom and found the staircase,
which, being carpeted, prevented his approach being heard, and he had
regained that degree of confidence that the presence of M. de Villefort
even would not have alarmed him. He was quite prepared for any such
encounter. He would at once approach Valentine’s father and acknowledge
all, begging Villefort to pardon and sanction the love which united two
fond and loving hearts. Morrel was mad.

Happily he did not meet anyone. Now, especially, did he find the
description Valentine had given of the interior of the house useful to
him; he arrived safely at the top of the staircase, and while he was
feeling his way, a sob indicated the direction he was to take. He turned
back, a door partly open enabled him to see his road, and to hear the
voice of one in sorrow. He pushed the door open and entered. At the
other end of the room, under a white sheet which covered it, lay the
corpse, still more alarming to Morrel since the account he had so
unexpectedly overheard. By its side, on her knees, and with her head
buried in the cushion of an easy-chair, was Valentine, trembling and
sobbing, her hands extended above her head, clasped and stiff. She had
turned from the window, which remained open, and was praying in accents
that would have affected the most unfeeling; her words were rapid,
incoherent, unintelligible, for the burning weight of grief almost
stopped her utterance.

The moon shining through the open blinds made the lamp appear to burn
paler, and cast a sepulchral hue over the whole scene. Morrel could not
resist this; he was not exemplary for piety, he was not easily
impressed, but Valentine suffering, weeping, wringing her hands before
him, was more than he could bear in silence. He sighed, and whispered a
name, and the head bathed in tears and pressed on the velvet cushion of
the chair—a head like that of a Magdalen by Correggio—was raised and
turned towards him. Valentine perceived him without betraying the least
surprise. A heart overwhelmed with one great grief is insensible to
minor emotions. Morrel held out his hand to her. Valentine, as her only
apology for not having met him, pointed to the corpse under the sheet,
and began to sob again.

“Valentine,” said Morrel with a trembling voice, “I had waited since
half-past eight, and did not see you come; I became uneasy, leaped the
wall, found my way through the garden, when voices conversing about the
fatal event——”

“What voices?” asked Valentine. Morrel shuddered as he thought of the
conversation of the doctor and M. de Villefort, and he thought he could
see through the sheet the extended hands, the stiff neck, and the purple
lips.

“Forgive me,” replied Morrel; “I will go away.”

“But what has become of M. d’Épinay?” replied Morrel.

“Alas,” said Morrel with a feeling of selfish joy; for he thought this
death would cause the wedding to be postponed indefinitely.

“Hark!” said Morrel. They both listened; steps were distinctly heard in
the corridor and on the stairs.

“To accompany the doctor to the door,” added Morrel.

“I imagined it must be,” said Morrel.

Valentine looked at the young man; they heard the street door close,
then M. de Villefort locked the garden door, and returned upstairs. He
stopped a moment in the anteroom, as if hesitating whether to turn to
his own apartment or into Madame de Saint-Méran’s; Morrel concealed
himself behind a door; Valentine remained motionless, grief seeming to
deprive her of all fear. M. de Villefort passed on to his own room.

Morrel looked at her with astonishment.

“Be careful, Valentine,” said Morrel, hesitating to comply with the
young girl’s wishes; “I now see my error—I acted like a madman in coming
in here. Are you sure you are more reasonable?”

“Valentine,” said Morrel, “death is in itself sacred.”

She then crossed the corridor, and led the way down a narrow staircase
to M. Noirtier’s room; Morrel followed her on tiptoe; at the door they
found the old servant.

The old man fixed his scrutinizing gaze with slight astonishment on
Morrel.

“It is M. Maximilian Morrel,” said she; “the son of that good merchant
of Marseilles, whom you doubtless recollect.”

“You like M. Maximilian Morrel, do you not, grandpapa?” asked Valentine.

Noirtier cast an intelligent glance at Morrel, as if to say, “perhaps I
may.”

Valentine arose, placed a chair for Morrel, requested Barrois not to
admit anyone, and having tenderly embraced her grandfather, and
sorrowfully taken leave of Morrel, she went away. To prove to Noirtier
that he was in Valentine’s confidence and knew all their secrets, Morrel
took the dictionary, a pen, and some paper, and placed them all on a
table where there was a light.

“But first,” said Morrel, “allow me, sir, to tell you who I am, how much
I love Mademoiselle Valentine, and what are my designs respecting her.”

It was an imposing sight to witness this old man, apparently a mere
useless burden, becoming the sole protector, support, and adviser of the
lovers who were both young, beautiful, and strong. His remarkably noble
and austere expression struck Morrel, who began his story with
trembling. He related the manner in which he had become acquainted with
Valentine, and how he had loved her, and that Valentine, in her solitude
and her misfortune, had accepted the offer of his devotion. He told him
his birth, his position, his fortune, and more than once, when he
consulted the look of the paralytic, that look answered, “That is good,
proceed.”

“And now,” said Morrel, when he had finished the first part of his
recital, “now I have told you of my love and my hopes, may I inform you
of my intentions?”

“There is another way,” said Morrel. The old man’s interrogative eye
said, “Which?”

Still, when Morrel had finished, he shut his eyes several times, which
was his manner of saying “No.”

“No?” said Morrel; “you disapprove of this second project, as you did of
the first?”

“But what then must be done?” asked Morrel. “Madame de Saint-Méran’s
last request was, that the marriage might not be delayed; must I let
things take their course?” Noirtier did not move. “I understand,” said
Morrel; “I am to wait.”

“Whence then will come the help we need—from chance?” resumed Morrel.

“The contract shall not be signed!” cried Morrel. “Oh, pardon me, sir; I
can scarcely realize so great a happiness. Will they not sign it?”

“No,” said the paralytic. Notwithstanding that assurance, Morrel still
hesitated. This promise of an impotent old man was so strange that,
instead of being the result of the power of his will, it might emanate
from enfeebled organs. Is it not natural that the madman, ignorant of
his folly, should attempt things beyond his power? The weak man talks of
burdens he can raise, the timid of giants he can confront, the poor of
treasures he spends, the most humble peasant, in the height of his
pride, calls himself Jupiter. Whether Noirtier understood the young
man’s indecision, or whether he had not full confidence in his docility,
he looked uneasily at him.

“What do you wish, sir?” asked Morrel; “that I should renew my promise
of remaining tranquil?” Noirtier’s eye remained fixed and firm, as if to
imply that a promise did not suffice; then it passed from his face to
his hands.

“Yes,” said the paralytic with the same solemnity. Morrel understood
that the old man attached great importance to an oath. He extended his
hand.

“Now,” said Morrel, “do you wish me to retire?”

Morrel made a sign that he was ready to obey. “But,” said he, “first
allow me to embrace you as your daughter did just now.” Noirtier’s
expression could not be understood. The young man pressed his lips on
the same spot, on the old man’s forehead, where Valentine’s had been.
Then he bowed a second time and retired.

He found outside the door the old servant, to whom Valentine had given
directions. Morrel was conducted along a dark passage, which led to a
little door opening on the garden, soon found the spot where he had
entered, with the assistance of the shrubs gained the top of the wall,
and by his ladder was in an instant in the clover-field where his
cabriolet was still waiting for him. He got in it, and thoroughly
wearied by so many emotions, arrived about midnight in the Rue Meslay,
threw himself on his bed and slept soundly.

Such was the conversation in almost all the carriages; these two sudden
deaths, so quickly following each other, astonished everyone, but no one
suspected the terrible secret which M. d’Avrigny had communicated, in
his nocturnal walk to M. de Villefort. They arrived in about an hour at
the cemetery; the weather was mild, but dull, and in harmony with the
funeral ceremony. Among the groups which flocked towards the family
vault, Château-Renaud recognized Morrel, who had come alone in a
cabriolet, and walked silently along the path bordered with yew-trees.

“I am no acquaintance of M. de Villefort’s,” answered Morrel, “but I was
of Madame de Saint-Méran.” Albert came up to them at this moment with
Franz.

“The time and place are but ill-suited for an introduction.” said
Albert; “but we are not superstitious. M. Morrel, allow me to present to
you M. Franz d’Épinay, a delightful travelling companion, with whom I
made the tour of Italy. My dear Franz, M. Maximilian Morrel, an
excellent friend I have acquired in your absence, and whose name you
will hear me mention every time I make any allusion to affection, wit,
or amiability.”

Morrel hesitated for a moment; he feared it would be hypocritical to
accost in a friendly manner the man whom he was tacitly opposing, but
his oath and the gravity of the circumstances recurred to his memory; he
struggled to conceal his emotion and bowed to Franz.

These apparently simple words pierced Morrel to the heart. This man had
seen Valentine, and spoken to her! The young and high-spirited officer
required all his strength of mind to resist breaking his oath. He took
the arm of Château-Renaud, and turned towards the vault, where the
attendants had already placed the two coffins.

As the religious ceremonies had all been performed at the door, and
there was no address given, the party all separated; Château-Renaud,
Albert, and Morrel, went one way, and Debray and Beauchamp the other.
Franz remained with M. de Villefort; at the gate of the cemetery Morrel
made an excuse to wait; he saw Franz and M. de Villefort get into the
same mourning-coach, and thought this meeting forboded evil. He then
returned to Paris, and although in the same carriage with Château-Renaud
and Albert, he did not hear one word of their conversation.

Thus, the future father and son-in-law stepped into the same carriage,
and Morrel, seeing them pass, became uneasy. Villefort and Franz
returned to the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. The procureur, without going to
see either his wife or his daughter, went at once to his study, and,
offering the young man a chair:

“‘The president then sought to make him speak more explicitly, but M. de
Quesnel replied that he wished first to know what they wanted with him.
He was then informed of the contents of the letter from the Island of
Elba, in which he was recommended to the club as a man who would be
likely to advance the interests of their party. One paragraph spoke of
the return of Bonaparte and promised another letter and further details,
on the arrival of the Pharaon belonging to the shipbuilder Morrel, of
Marseilles, whose captain was entirely devoted to the emperor. During
all this time, the general, on whom they thought to have relied as on a
brother, manifested evidently signs of discontent and repugnance. When
the reading was finished, he remained silent, with knitted brows.

In the midst of all the strange events which had crowded one on the
other, an indefinable sentiment of dread had taken possession of
Valentine’s mind. She expected every moment that she should see Morrel
appear, pale and trembling, to forbid the signing of the contract, like
the Laird of Ravenswood in The Bride of Lammermoor.

“Saved?” repeated Morrel, not being able to conceive such intense
happiness; “by whom?”

“By my grandfather. Oh, Morrel, pray love him for all his goodness to
us!”

Morrel swore to love him with all his soul; and at that moment he could
safely promise to do so, for he felt as though it were not enough to
love him merely as a friend or even as a father, he worshiped him as a
god.

The conversation had now turned upon a topic so pleasing to Morrel, that
he was ready to accede to anything that Valentine thought fit to
propose, and he likewise felt that a piece of intelligence such as he
just heard ought to be more than sufficient to content him for one day.
However, he would not leave without the promise of seeing Valentine
again the next night. Valentine promised all that Morrel required of
her, and certainly it was less difficult now for her to believe that she
should marry Maximilian than it was an hour ago to assure herself that
she should not marry Franz.

While Albert was lashing the front of his carriage in the same manner
that he had the newspapers which were the innocent agents of his
discomfiture, as he was crossing the barrier he perceived Morrel, who
was walking with a quick step and a bright eye. He was passing the
Chinese Baths, and appeared to have come from the direction of the Porte
Saint-Martin, and to be going towards the Madeleine.

Morrel was, in fact, very happy. M. Noirtier had just sent for him, and
he was in such haste to know the reason of his doing so that he had not
stopped to take a cab, placing infinitely more dependence on his own two
legs than on the four legs of a cab-horse. He had therefore set off at a
furious rate from the Rue Meslay, and was hastening with rapid strides
in the direction of the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.

Morrel advanced with a firm, manly tread, and poor Barrois followed him
as he best might. Morrel was only thirty-one, Barrois was sixty years of
age; Morrel was deeply in love, and Barrois was dying with heat and
exertion. These two men, thus opposed in age and interests, resembled
two parts of a triangle, presenting the extremes of separation, yet
nevertheless possessing their point of union. This point of union was
Noirtier, and it was he who had just sent for Morrel, with the request
that the latter would lose no time in coming to him—a command which
Morrel obeyed to the letter, to the great discomfiture of Barrois. On
arriving at the house, Morrel was not even out of breath, for love lends
wings to our desires; but Barrois, who had long forgotten what it was to
love, was sorely fatigued by the expedition he had been constrained to
use.

The old servant introduced Morrel by a private entrance, closed the door
of the study, and soon the rustling of a dress announced the arrival of
Valentine. She looked marvellously beautiful in her deep mourning dress,
and Morrel experienced such intense delight in gazing upon her that he
felt as if he could almost have dispensed with the conversation of her
grandfather.

But the easy-chair of the old man was heard rolling along the floor, and
he soon made his appearance in the room. Noirtier acknowledged by a look
of extreme kindness and benevolence the thanks which Morrel lavished on
him for his timely intervention on behalf of Valentine and himself—an
intervention which had saved them from despair. Morrel then cast on the
invalid an interrogative look as to the new favor which he designed to
bestow on him. Valentine was sitting at a little distance from them,
timidly awaiting the moment when she should be obliged to speak.
Noirtier fixed his eyes on her.

“Monsieur Morrel,” said Valentine to the young man, who was regarding
her with the most intense interest, “my grandfather, M. Noirtier, had a
thousand things to say, which he told me three days ago; and now, he has
sent for you, that I may repeat them to you. I will repeat them, then;
and since he has chosen me as his interpreter, I will be faithful to the
trust, and will not alter a word of his intentions.”

Valentine cast down her eyes; this was a good omen for Morrel, for he
knew that nothing but happiness could have the power of thus overcoming
Valentine.

“And what?” demanded Morrel.

Valentine pronounced these last few words in such a low tone, that
nothing but Morrel’s intense interest in what she was saying could have
enabled him to hear them.

“Once under my grandfather’s roof, M. Morrel can visit me in the
presence of my good and worthy protector, if we still feel that the
union we contemplated will be likely to insure our future comfort and
happiness; in that case I shall expect M. Morrel to come and claim me at
my own hands. But, alas, I have heard it said that hearts inflamed by
obstacles to their desire grew cold in time of security; I trust we
shall never find it so in our experience!”

“Oh,” cried Morrel, almost tempted to throw himself on his knees before
Noirtier and Valentine, and to adore them as two superior beings, “what
have I ever done in my life to merit such unbounded happiness?”

“And I swear to make all the sacrifices which this word imposes, sir,”
said Morrel, “not only with resignation, but with cheerfulness.”

Morrel looked obedience to her commands. Noirtier regarded the lovers
with a look of ineffable tenderness, while Barrois, who had remained in
the room in the character of a man privileged to know everything that
passed, smiled on the youthful couple as he wiped the perspiration from
his bald forehead.

“Ah, I have been running very fast, mademoiselle, but I must do M.
Morrel the justice to say that he ran still faster.”

Barrois took away the waiter, and hardly was he outside the door, which
in his haste he forgot to shut, than they saw him throw back his head
and empty to the very dregs the glass which Valentine had filled.
Valentine and Morrel were exchanging their adieux in the presence of
Noirtier when a ring was heard at the door-bell. It was the signal of a
visit. Valentine looked at her watch.

“He will come in here, and M. Morrel had better go,—do you not think so,
grandpapa?”

“Barrois will open the door for you,” said Valentine, addressing Morrel.
“And now remember one thing, Monsieur Officer, that my grandfather
commands you not to take any rash or ill-advised step which would be
likely to compromise our happiness.”

“I promised him to wait,” replied Morrel; “and I will wait.”

“He is going to fall!” cried Morrel.

By this time his haggard eyes had the appearance of being ready to start
from their sockets; his head fell back, and the lower extremities of the
body began to stiffen. Valentine uttered a cry of horror; Morrel took
her in his arms, as if to defend her from some unknown danger.

At this moment M. de Villefort, attracted by the noise, appeared on the
threshold. Morrel relaxed his hold of Valentine, and retreating to a
distant corner of the room remained half hidden behind a curtain. Pale
as if he had been gazing on a serpent, he fixed his terrified eye on the
agonized sufferer.

Villefort seemed stupefied with astonishment, and remained gazing
intently on the scene before him without uttering a word. He had not
seen Morrel. After a moment of dumb contemplation, during which his face
became pale and his hair seemed to stand on end, he sprang towards the
door, crying out:

“Take this,” said Madame de Villefort, giving her smelling-bottle to
Valentine. “They will, no doubt, bleed him; therefore I will retire, for
I cannot endure the sight of blood;” and she followed her husband
upstairs. Morrel now emerged from his hiding-place, where he had
remained quite unperceived, so great had been the general confusion.

Morrel looked towards Noirtier for permission to retire. The old man,
who had preserved all his usual coolness, made a sign to him to do so.
The young man pressed Valentine’s hand to his lips, and then left the
house by a back staircase.

“Yes, to be sure; must I say Baron Danglars? I might as well say Count
Benedetto. He was an old friend of mine and if he had not so bad a
memory he ought to invite me to your wedding, seeing he came to mine.
Yes, yes, to mine; gad, he was not so proud then,—he was an under-clerk
to the good M. Morrel. I have dined many times with him and the Count of
Morcerf, so you see I have some high connections and were I to cultivate
them a little, we might meet in the same drawing-rooms.”

Beauchamp availed himself of Albert’s permission, and left him,
promising to call for him at a quarter before eight. On his return home,
Albert expressed his wish to Franz Debray, and Morrel, to see them at
the Opera that evening. Then he went to see his mother, who since the
events of the day before had refused to see anyone, and had kept her
room. He found her in bed, overwhelmed with grief at this public
humiliation.

Albert wandered about the theatre until the curtain was drawn up. He
hoped to meet with M. de Monte Cristo either in the lobby or on the
stairs. The bell summoned him to his seat, and he entered the orchestra
with Château-Renaud and Beauchamp. But his eyes scarcely quitted the box
between the columns, which remained obstinately closed during the whole
of the first act. At last, as Albert was looking at his watch for about
the hundredth time, at the beginning of the second act the door opened,
and Monte Cristo entered, dressed in black, and, leaning over the front
of the box, looked around the pit. Morrel followed him, and looked also
for his sister and brother in-law; he soon discovered them in another
box, and kissed his hand to them.

The count, in his survey of the pit, encountered a pale face and
threatening eyes, which evidently sought to gain his attention. He
recognized Albert, but thought it better not to notice him, as he looked
so angry and discomposed. Without communicating his thoughts to his
companion, he sat down, drew out his opera-glass, and looked another
way. Although apparently not noticing Albert, he did not, however, lose
sight of him, and when the curtain fell at the end of the second act, he
saw him leave the orchestra with his two friends. Then his head was seen
passing at the back of the boxes, and the count knew that the
approaching storm was intended to fall on him. He was at the moment
conversing cheerfully with Morrel, but he was well prepared for what
might happen.

The countenance of this man, who possessed such extraordinary control
over his feelings, expressed the most perfect cordiality. Morrel only
then recollected the letter he had received from the viscount, in which,
without assigning any reason, he begged him to go to the Opera, but he
understood that something terrible was brooding.

At this name a murmur of astonishment passed around the group of
spectators of this scene. They had talked of no one but Morcerf the
whole day. Albert understood the allusion in a moment, and was about to
throw his glove at the count, when Morrel seized his hand, while
Beauchamp and Château-Renaud, fearing the scene would surpass the limits
of a challenge, held him back. But Monte Cristo, without rising, and
leaning forward in his chair, merely stretched out his arm and, taking
the damp, crushed glove from the clenched hand of the young man:

Wild, almost unconscious, and with eyes inflamed, Albert stepped back,
and Morrel closed the door. Monte Cristo took up his glass again as if
nothing had happened; his face was like marble, and his heart was like
bronze. Morrel whispered, “What have you done to him?”

“Indeed?” said Morrel. “I had been told, but would not credit it, that
the Grecian slave I have seen with you here in this very box was the
daughter of Ali Pasha.”

“Then,” said Morrel, “I understand it all, and this scene was
premeditated.”

“What shall I do with Albert? As certainly, Maximilian, as I now press
your hand, I shall kill him before ten o’clock tomorrow morning.”
Morrel, in his turn, took Monte Cristo’s hand in both of his, and he
shuddered to feel how cold and steady it was.

Morrel, amazed, let fall Monte Cristo’s hand. “Count, count!” said he.

Morrel saw it was useless to say more, and refrained. The curtain, which
had risen at the close of the scene with Albert, again fell, and a rap
was heard at the door.

“Now,” said Monte Cristo, turning towards Morrel, “I may depend upon
you, may I not?”

“Certainly,” said Morrel, “I am at your service, count; still——”

“The young man himself is acting blindfolded, and knows not the true
cause, which is known only to God and to me; but I give you my word,
Morrel, that God, who does know it, will be on our side.”

“Enough,” said Morrel; “who is your second witness?”

“I know no one in Paris, Morrel, on whom I could confer that honor
besides you and your brother Emmanuel. Do you think Emmanuel would
oblige me?”

Monte Cristo waited, according to his usual custom, until Duprez had
sung his famous “Suivez-moi!” then he rose and went out. Morrel took
leave of him at the door, renewing his promise to be with him the next
morning at seven o’clock, and to bring Emmanuel. Then he stepped into
his coupé, calm and smiling, and was at home in five minutes. No one who
knew the count could mistake his expression when, on entering, he said:

“You have seen that he would have thrown his glove in my face if Morrel,
one of my friends, had not stopped him.”

“I bequeath to Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis,—and son of my
former patron, Pierre Morrel, shipowner at Marseilles,—the sum of twenty
millions, a part of which may be offered to his sister Julie and
brother-in-law Emmanuel, if he does not fear this increase of fortune
may mar their happiness. These twenty millions are concealed in my
grotto at Monte Cristo, of which Bertuccio knows the secret. If his
heart is free, and he will marry Haydée, the daughter of Ali Pasha of
Yanina, whom I have brought up with the love of a father, and who has
shown the love and tenderness of a daughter for me, he will thus
accomplish my last wish. This will has already constituted Haydée
heiress of the rest of my fortune, consisting of lands, funds in
England, Austria, and Holland, furniture in my different palaces and
houses, and which without the twenty millions and the legacies to my
servants, may still amount to sixty millions.”

A moment afterwards he heard a noise in the drawing-room, and went to
open the door himself. Morrel was there; he had come twenty minutes
before the time appointed.

“Morrel,” said he, “it is a happy day for me, to feel that I am beloved
by such a man as you. Good-morning, Emmanuel; you will come with me
then, Maximilian?”

“But, Morrel, Albert is your friend?”

“Thank you, Morrel.” Then ringing the bell once, “Look.” said he to Ali,
who came immediately, “take that to my solicitor. It is my will, Morrel.
When I am dead, you will go and examine it.”

“What?” said Morrel, “you dead?”

“Morrel,” said the count, “have you ever seen me fire a pistol?”

“Well, we have time; look.” Monte Cristo took the pistols he held in his
hand when Mercédès entered, and fixing an ace of clubs against the iron
plate, with four shots he successively shot off the four sides of the
club. At each shot Morrel turned pale. He examined the bullets with
which Monte Cristo performed this dexterous feat, and saw that they were
no larger than buckshot.

“You are right,” said Monte Cristo; “and I have none.” These words were
uttered in a tone which made Morrel shudder.

“Morrel,” said he, “do not forget what you have just seen.”

“I will tell you, Morrel,” said the count, “that I do not need
entreating to spare the life of M. de Morcerf; he shall be so well
spared, that he will return quietly with his two friends, while I——”

“As I told you, my dear Morrel, M. de Morcerf will kill me.”

Morrel looked at him in utter amazement. “But what has happened, then,
since last evening, count?”

“Told me, Morrel, that I had lived long enough.”

“We are first,” said Morrel, looking out of the window.

Monte Cristo drew Morrel a step or two behind his brother-in-law.

“Maximilian,” said he, “are your affections disengaged?” Morrel looked
at Monte Cristo with astonishment. “I do not seek your confidence, my
dear friend. I only ask you a simple question; answer it;—that is all I
require.”

“Because I sigh when thinking of someone I am leaving? Come, Morrel, it
is not like a soldier to be so bad a judge of courage. Do I regret life?
What is it to me, who have passed twenty years between life and death?
Moreover, do not alarm yourself, Morrel; this weakness, if it is such,
is betrayed to you alone. I know the world is a drawing-room, from which
we must retire politely and honestly; that is, with a bow, and our debts
of honor paid.”

“I will inquire,” said Morrel.

“You need not fear.” Morrel advanced towards Beauchamp and Château-
Renaud, who, seeing his intention, came to meet him. The three young men
bowed to each other courteously, if not affably.

“Excuse me, gentlemen,” said Morrel, “but I do not see M. de Morcerf.”

“Ah,” said Morrel. Beauchamp pulled out his watch.

“It is only five minutes past eight,” said he to Morrel; “there is not
much time lost yet.”

“Oh, I made no allusion of that kind,” replied Morrel.

“Because,” said Debray, “Albert sent this morning to request us to
come.” Beauchamp and Château-Renaud exchanged looks of astonishment. “I
think I understand his reason,” said Morrel.

“I thank you, gentlemen,” said he, “for having complied with my request;
I feel extremely grateful for this mark of friendship.” Morrel had
stepped back as Morcerf approached, and remained at a short distance.
“And to you also, M. Morrel, my thanks are due. Come, there cannot be
too many.”

“M. Morrel,” said Château-Renaud, “will you apprise the Count of Monte
Cristo that M. de Morcerf is arrived, and we are at his disposal?”

Morrel was preparing to fulfil his commission. Beauchamp had meanwhile
drawn the box of pistols from the carriage.

“In private?” asked Morrel.

Albert’s witnesses looked at each other. Franz and Debray exchanged some
words in a whisper, and Morrel, rejoiced at this unexpected incident,
went to fetch the count, who was walking in a retired path with
Emmanuel.

“I do not think that such is his intention,” said Morrel.

Meanwhile Monte Cristo had also returned to town with Emmanuel and
Maximilian. Their return was cheerful. Emmanuel did not conceal his joy
at the peaceful termination of the affair, and was loud in his
expressions of delight. Morrel, in a corner of the carriage, allowed his
brother-in-law’s gayety to expend itself in words, while he felt equal
inward joy, which, however, betrayed itself only in his countenance.

“If it were not ridiculous to make a display of our triumph, said
Morrel, I would invite the count to our house; besides that, he
doubtless has some trembling heart to comfort. So we will take leave of
our friend, and let him hasten home.”

“Stop a moment,” said Monte Cristo; “do not let me lose both my
companions. Return, Emmanuel, to your charming wife, and present my best
compliments to her; and do you, Morrel, accompany me to the Champs-
Élysées.”

“No,” replied the young man. The door was closed, and the carriage
proceeded. “See what good fortune I brought you!” said Morrel, when he
was alone with the count. “Have you not thought so?”

“It is miraculous!” continued Morrel, answering his own thoughts.

“For Albert is brave,” resumed Morrel.

“And I know he has fought two duels,” said Morrel. “How can you
reconcile that with his conduct this morning?”

“It is well for Albert he is not in the army,” said Morrel.

“Come,” said the count mildly, “do not entertain the prejudices of
ordinary men, Morrel! Acknowledge, that if Albert is brave, he cannot be
a coward; he must then have had some reason for acting as he did this
morning, and confess that his conduct is more heroic than otherwise.”

“Doubtless, doubtless,” said Morrel; “but I shall say, like the
Spaniard, ‘He has not been so brave today as he was yesterday.’”

“You will breakfast with me, will you not, Morrel?” said the count, to
turn the conversation.

Morrel smiled, and shook his head.

“Well, count,” replied Morrel gayly, “I will not dispute it.”

“Go,” said the count deliberately; “go, dear friend, but promise me if
you meet with any obstacle to remember that I have some power in this
world, that I am happy to use that power in the behalf of those I love,
and that I love you, Morrel.”

They had arrived in the Champs-Élysées. Monte Cristo opened the
carriage-door, Morrel sprang out on the pavement, Bertuccio was waiting
on the steps. Morrel disappeared down the Avenue de Marigny, and Monte
Cristo hastened to join Bertuccio.

We may easily conceive where Morrel’s appointment was. On leaving Monte
Cristo he walked slowly towards Villefort’s; we say slowly, for Morrel
had more than half an hour to spare to go five hundred steps, but he had
hastened to take leave of Monte Cristo because he wished to be alone
with his thoughts. He knew his time well—the hour when Valentine was
giving Noirtier his breakfast, and was sure not to be disturbed in the
performance of this pious duty. Noirtier and Valentine had given him
leave to go twice a week, and he was now availing himself of that
permission.

He arrived; Valentine was expecting him. Uneasy and almost crazed, she
seized his hand and led him to her grandfather. This uneasiness,
amounting almost to frenzy, arose from the report Morcerf’s adventure
had made in the world, for the affair at the Opera was generally known.
No one at Villefort’s doubted that a duel would ensue from it.
Valentine, with her woman’s instinct, guessed that Morrel would be Monte
Cristo’s second, and from the young man’s well-known courage and his
great affection for the count, she feared that he would not content
himself with the passive part assigned to him. We may easily understand
how eagerly the particulars were asked for, given, and received; and
Morrel could read an indescribable joy in the eyes of his beloved, when
she knew that the termination of this affair was as happy as it was
unexpected.

“Now,” said Valentine, motioning to Morrel to sit down near her
grandfather, while she took her seat on his footstool,—“now let us talk
about our own affairs. You know, Maximilian, grandpapa once thought of
leaving this house, and taking an apartment away from M. de
Villefort’s.”

“And do you know,” said Valentine, “what reason grandpapa gives for
leaving this house.” Noirtier looked at Valentine to impose silence, but
she did not notice him; her looks, her eyes, her smile, were all for
Morrel.

“Oh, whatever may be M. Noirtier’s reason,” answered Morrel, “I can
readily believe it to be a good one.”

“Indeed?” said Morrel; “in that M. Noirtier may be right; you have not
seemed to be well for the last fortnight.”

“Do you then really suffer?” asked Morrel quickly.

From Valentine the young man looked towards Noirtier. The latter watched
with strange and deep interest the young girl, absorbed by her
affection, and he also, like Morrel, followed those traces of inward
suffering which was so little perceptible to a common observer that they
escaped the notice of everyone but the grandfather and the lover.

“But,” said Morrel, “I thought this mixture, of which you now take four
spoonfuls, was prepared for M. Noirtier?”

“The sun is not shining,” said Morrel, more alarmed by Noirtier’s
expression than by Valentine’s indisposition. He ran towards her. The
young girl smiled.

Morrel watched her as she left the room; he heard her ascend the little
staircase which led both to Madame de Villefort’s apartments and to
hers. As soon as she was gone, Noirtier made a sign to Morrel to take
the dictionary. Morrel obeyed; guided by Valentine, he had learned how
to understand the old man quickly. Accustomed, however, as he was to the
work, he had to repeat most of the letters of the alphabet and to find
every word in the dictionary, so that it was ten minutes before the
thought of the old man was translated by these words,

Morrel rang immediately for the servant who had taken Barrois’s
situation, and in Noirtier’s name gave that order. The servant soon
returned. The decanter and the glass were completely empty. Noirtier
made a sign that he wished to speak.

“Ask her,” said Morrel, translating Noirtier’s thought this time by his
look. The servant went out, but returned almost immediately.
“Mademoiselle Valentine passed through the room to go to Madame de
Villefort’s,” said he; “and in passing, as she was thirsty, she drank
what remained in the glass; as for the decanter, Master Edward had
emptied that to make a pond for his ducks.”

Valentine also knew the truth, but she did not answer. A single word had
reminded her that Morrel was expecting her in M. Noirtier’s room. Deeply
engaged with a sort of inward contemplation, Valentine had ceased for a
moment to join in the conversation. She would, indeed, have found it
impossible to repeat what had been said the last few minutes, when
suddenly Madame Danglars’ hand, pressed on her arm, aroused her from her
lethargy.

She was within three steps of the bottom; she already heard Morrel’s
voice, when suddenly a cloud passed over her eyes, her stiffened foot
missed the step, her hands had no power to hold the baluster, and
falling against the wall she lost her balance wholly and toppled to the
floor. Morrel bounded to the door, opened it, and found Valentine
stretched out at the bottom of the stairs. Quick as a flash, he raised
her in his arms and placed her in a chair. Valentine opened her eyes.

“You have hurt yourself, perhaps,” said Morrel. “What can I do for you,
Valentine?”

“Another attack of giddiness,” said Morrel, clasping his hands. “Oh,
attend to it, Valentine, I entreat you.”

“Yes,” cried Morrel, “make haste. So long as you are not mine,
Valentine, I shall always think I may lose you.”

She burst into a forced and melancholy laugh, her arms stiffened and
twisted, her head fell back on her chair, and she remained motionless.
The cry of terror which was stopped on Noirtier’s lips, seemed to start
from his eyes. Morrel understood it; he knew he must call assistance.
The young man rang the bell violently; the housemaid who had been in
Mademoiselle Valentine’s room, and the servant who had replaced Barrois,
ran in at the same moment. Valentine was so pale, so cold, so inanimate
that without listening to what was said to them they were seized with
the fear which pervaded that house, and they flew into the passage
crying for help. Madame Danglars and Eugénie were going out at that
moment; they heard the cause of the disturbance.

Morrel looked at Noirtier who had recovered his self-command, and with a
glance indicated the closet where once before under somewhat similar
circumstances, he had taken refuge. He had only time to get his hat and
throw himself breathless into the closet when the procureur’s footstep
was heard in the passage.

He flew from the apartment, and Morrel at the same moment darted out at
the other door. He had been struck to the heart by a frightful
recollection—the conversation he had heard between the doctor and
Villefort the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death, recurred to him;
these symptoms, to a less alarming extent, were the same which had
preceded the death of Barrois. At the same time Monte Cristo’s voice
seemed to resound in his ear with the words he had heard only two hours
before, “Whatever you want, Morrel, come to me; I have great power.”

The same cabriolet which had brought Villefort took them back at full
speed, and at this moment Morrel rapped at Monte Cristo’s door.

The count was in his study and was reading with an angry look something
which Bertuccio had brought in haste. Hearing the name of Morrel, who
had left him only two hours before, the count raised his head, arose,
and sprang to meet him.

“What is the matter, Maximilian?” asked he; “you are pale, and the
perspiration rolls from your forehead.” Morrel fell into a chair.

“Yes,” said Morrel, “it is true; I have but now left a house where death
has just entered, to run to you.”

“No,” said Morrel; “is someone dead in his house?”

“Oh,” said Morrel, “I know not, indeed, if I may reveal this secret to
mortal ears, but fatality impels me, necessity constrains me, count——”
Morrel hesitated.

“You are right, Morrel; God is speaking to your heart, and your heart
speaks to you. Tell me what it says.”

“No, I will go and speak to him myself.” Morrel went out, called
Baptistin, and whispered a few words to him. The valet ran directly.

“Well, have you sent?” asked Monte Cristo, seeing Morrel return.

“This is a gloomy introduction, if I may judge from your pallor and
shuddering, Morrel.”

“Yes,” continued Morrel, “death had entered that house twice within one
month.”

Morrel shuddered. There was something mournful, solemn, and terrible in
the count’s manner.

“It has returned, count,” exclaimed Morrel; “that is why I hastened to
you.”

“Well, what do you wish me to do? Do you wish me, for instance, to give
information to the procureur?” Monte Cristo uttered the last words with
so much meaning that Morrel, starting up, cried out:

Deep grief was depicted on Morrel’s features; he seized Monte Cristo’s
hand. “But it is beginning again, I say!”

“You knew it?” cried Morrel, in such a paroxysm of terror that Monte
Cristo started,—he whom the falling heavens would have found unmoved;
“you knew it, and said nothing?”

“But I,” cried Morrel, groaning with sorrow, “I love her!”

“You love?—whom?” cried Monte Cristo, starting to his feet, and seizing
the two hands which Morrel was raising towards heaven.

Never had Morrel witnessed such an expression—never had so terrible an
eye flashed before his face—never had the genius of terror he had so
often seen, either on the battle-field or in the murderous nights of
Algeria, shaken around him more dreadful fire. He drew back terrified.

Morrel groaned.

Morrel shook his head sorrowfully.

“I tell you to hope. Do you understand me?” cried Monte Cristo.
“Remember that I never uttered a falsehood and am never deceived. It is
twelve o’clock, Maximilian; thank heaven that you came at noon rather
than in the evening, or tomorrow morning. Listen, Morrel—it is noon; if
Valentine is not now dead, she will not die.”

“How so?” cried Morrel, “when I left her dying?”

Morrel, subdued by the extraordinary ascendancy Monte Cristo exercised
over everything around him, did not endeavor to resist it. He pressed
the count’s hand and left. He stopped one moment at the door for
Baptistin, whom he saw in the Rue Matignon, and who was running.

Every morning Morrel called on Noirtier to receive news of Valentine,
and, extraordinary as it seemed, each day found him less uneasy.
Certainly, though Valentine still labored under dreadful nervous
excitement, she was better; and moreover, Monte Cristo had told him
when, half distracted, he had rushed to the count’s house, that if she
were not dead in two hours she would be saved. Now four days had
elapsed, and Valentine still lived.

The nervous excitement of which we speak pursued Valentine even in her
sleep, or rather in that state of somnolence which succeeded her waking
hours; it was then, in the silence of night, in the dim light shed from
the alabaster lamp on the chimney-piece, that she saw the shadows pass
and repass which hover over the bed of sickness, and fan the fever with
their trembling wings. First she fancied she saw her stepmother
threatening her, then Morrel stretched his arms towards her; sometimes
mere strangers, like the Count of Monte Cristo came to visit her; even
the very furniture, in these moments of delirium, seemed to move, and
this state lasted till about three o’clock in the morning, when a deep,
heavy slumber overcame the young girl, from which she did not awake till
daylight.

From behind the door a human figure appeared, but the girl was too
familiar with such apparitions to be alarmed, and therefore only stared,
hoping to recognize Morrel. The figure advanced towards the bed and
appeared to listen with profound attention. At this moment a ray of
light glanced across the face of the midnight visitor.

There was no fear of her falling asleep. One terrible idea pressed upon
her mind,—that someone existed in the world who had attempted to
assassinate her, and who was about to endeavor to do so again. Supposing
this person, wearied at the inefficacy of the poison, should, as Monte
Cristo intimated, have recourse to steel!—What if the count should have
no time to run to her rescue!—What if her last moments were approaching,
and she should never again see Morrel!

The two men turned round, and saw Morrel standing at the door, pale and
terror-stricken. This is what had happened. At the usual time, Morrel
had presented himself at the little door leading to Noirtier’s room.
Contrary to custom, the door was open, and having no occasion to ring he
entered. He waited for a moment in the hall and called for a servant to
conduct him to M. Noirtier; but no one answered, the servants having, as
we know, deserted the house. Morrel had no particular reason for
uneasiness; Monte Cristo had promised him that Valentine should live,
and so far he had always fulfilled his word. Every night the count had
given him news, which was the next morning confirmed by Noirtier. Still
this extraordinary silence appeared strange to him, and he called a
second and third time; still no answer. Then he determined to go up.
Noirtier’s room was opened, like all the rest. The first thing he saw
was the old man sitting in his armchair in his usual place, but his eyes
expressed alarm, which was confirmed by the pallor which overspread his
features.

“How are you, sir?” asked Morrel, with a sickness of heart.

“You are thoughtful, sir,” continued Morrel; “you want something; shall
I call one of the servants?”

Morrel pulled the bell, but though he nearly broke the cord no one
answered. He turned towards Noirtier; the pallor and anguish expressed
on his countenance momentarily increased.

“Oh,” exclaimed Morrel, “why do they not come? Is anyone ill in the
house?” The eyes of Noirtier seemed as though they would start from
their sockets. “What is the matter? You alarm me. Valentine? Valentine?”

Villefort rose, half-ashamed of being surprised in such a paroxysm of
grief. The terrible office he had held for twenty-five years had
succeeded in making him more or less than man. His glance, at first
wandering, fixed itself upon Morrel. “Who are you, sir,” he asked, “that
forget that this is not the manner to enter a house stricken with death?
Go, sir, go!”

But Morrel remained motionless; he could not detach his eyes from that
disordered bed, and the pale corpse of the young girl who was lying on
it.

“Go!—do you hear?” said Villefort, while d’Avrigny advanced to lead
Morrel out. Maximilian stared for a moment at the corpse, gazed all
around the room, then upon the two men; he opened his mouth to speak,
but finding it impossible to give utterance to the innumerable ideas
that occupied his brain, he went out, thrusting his hands through his
hair in such a manner that Villefort and d’Avrigny, for a moment
diverted from the engrossing topic, exchanged glances, which seemed to
say,—“He is mad!”

But in less than five minutes the staircase groaned beneath an
extraordinary weight. Morrel was seen carrying, with superhuman
strength, the armchair containing Noirtier upstairs. When he reached the
landing he placed the armchair on the floor and rapidly rolled it into
Valentine’s room. This could only have been accomplished by means of
unnatural strength supplied by powerful excitement. But the most fearful
spectacle was Noirtier being pushed towards the bed, his face expressing
all his meaning, and his eyes supplying the want of every other faculty.
That pale face and flaming glance appeared to Villefort like a frightful
apparition. Each time he had been brought into contact with his father,
something terrible had happened.

“See what they have done!” cried Morrel, with one hand leaning on the
back of the chair, and the other extended towards Valentine. “See, my
father, see!”

“Sir,” cried Morrel, seizing the moist hand of the paralytic, “they ask
me who I am, and what right I have to be here. Oh, you know it, tell
them, tell them!” And the young man’s voice was choked by sobs.

“Tell them,” said Morrel in a hoarse voice, “tell them that I am her
betrothed. Tell them she was my beloved, my noble girl, my only blessing
in the world. Tell them—oh, tell them, that corpse belongs to me!”

But Morrel saw nothing; he had grasped the hand of Valentine, and unable
to weep vented his agony in groans as he bit the sheets. For some time
nothing was heard in that chamber but sobs, exclamations, and prayers.
At length Villefort, the most composed of all, spoke:

“You are mistaken, sir,” exclaimed Morrel, raising himself on one knee,
his heart pierced by a more acute pang than any he had yet felt—“you are
mistaken; Valentine, dying as she has, not only requires a priest, but
an avenger. You, M. de Villefort, send for the priest; I will be the
avenger.”

“What do you mean, sir?” asked Villefort, trembling at the new idea
inspired by the delirium of Morrel.

“Gentlemen,” said Morrel, reading all that passed through the minds of
the witnesses to the scene, “I know what I am saying, and you know as
well as I do what I am about to say—Valentine has been assassinated!”

“Now, sir,” continued Morrel, “in these days no one can disappear by
violent means without some inquiries being made as to the cause of her
disappearance, even were she not a young, beautiful, and adorable
creature like Valentine. Now, M. le Procureur du Roi,” said Morrel with
increasing vehemence, “no mercy is allowed; I denounce the crime; it is
your place to seek the assassin.”

The eyes of Noirtier lighted up with rage, and d’Avrigny prepared to
speak. Morrel, however, extended his arm, and commanded silence.

“And I say that murders are committed here,” said Morrel, whose voice,
though lower in tone, lost none of its terrible distinctness: “I tell
you that this is the fourth victim within the last four months. I tell
you, Valentine’s life was attempted by poison four days ago, though she
escaped, owing to the precautions of M. Noirtier. I tell you that the
dose has been double, the poison changed, and that this time it has
succeeded. I tell you that you know these things as well as I do, since
this gentleman has forewarned you, both as a doctor and as a friend.”

“I rave?” said Morrel; “well, then, I appeal to M. d’Avrigny himself.
Ask him, sir, if he recollects the words he uttered in the garden of
this house on the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death. You thought
yourselves alone, and talked about that tragical death, and the fatality
you mentioned then is the same which has caused the murder of
Valentine.” Villefort and d’Avrigny exchanged looks.

“Yes, yes,” continued Morrel; “recall the scene, for the words you
thought were only given to silence and solitude fell into my ears.
Certainly, after witnessing the culpable indolence manifested by M. de
Villefort towards his own relations, I ought to have denounced him to
the authorities; then I should not have been an accomplice to thy death,
as I now am, sweet, beloved Valentine; but the accomplice shall become
the avenger. This fourth murder is apparent to all, and if thy father
abandon thee, Valentine, it is I, and I swear it, that shall pursue the
assassin.”

And this time, as though nature had at least taken compassion on the
vigorous frame, nearly bursting with its own strength, the words of
Morrel were stifled in his throat; his breast heaved; the tears, so long
rebellious, gushed from his eyes; and he threw himself weeping on his
knees by the side of the bed.

Then d’Avrigny spoke. “And I, too,” he exclaimed in a low voice, “I
unite with M. Morrel in demanding justice for crime; my blood boils at
the idea of having encouraged a murderer by my cowardly concession.”

“Oh, merciful Heavens!” murmured Villefort. Morrel raised his head, and
reading the eyes of the old man, which gleamed with unnatural lustre,—

“Do you know the assassin?” asked Morrel.

Noirtier looked upon Morrel with one of those melancholy smiles which
had so often made Valentine happy, and thus fixed his attention. Then,
having riveted the eyes of his interlocutor on his own, he glanced
towards the door.

“Do you wish me to leave?” said Morrel, sadly.

“May I, at least, return?” asked Morrel.

D’Avrigny took the young man’s arm, and led him out of the room. A more
than deathlike silence then reigned in the house. At the end of a
quarter of an hour a faltering footstep was heard, and Villefort
appeared at the door of the apartment where d’Avrigny and Morrel had
been staying, one absorbed in meditation, the other in grief.

Morrel looked attentively on Villefort. His face was livid, large drops
rolled down his face, and in his fingers he held the fragments of a
quill pen which he had torn to atoms.

“But,” said Morrel, “the culprit—the murderer—the assassin.”

“Yes,” resolutely replied Noirtier. Morrel suffered an exclamation of
horror and surprise to escape him.

“Will this promise be fulfilled, M. Noirtier?” asked Morrel, while
d’Avrigny looked inquiringly.

“Swear, then,” said Villefort, joining the hands of Morrel and
d’Avrigny, “swear that you will spare the honor of my house, and leave
me to avenge my child.”

D’Avrigny turned round and uttered a very feeble “Yes,” but Morrel,
disengaging his hand, rushed to the bed, and after having pressed the
cold lips of Valentine with his own, hurriedly left, uttering a long,
deep groan of despair and anguish.

“I believe so,” replied the secretary with slight uneasiness. “But Monte
Cristo is not the only one I miss here; I do not see Morrel.”

“Morrel? Do they know him?” asked Château-Renaud. “I think he has only
been introduced to Madame de Villefort.”

“Where is Morrel?” he asked; “do either of these gentlemen know where he
is?”

The shadow Monte Cristo had noticed passed rapidly behind the tomb of
Abélard and Héloïse, placed itself close to the heads of the horses
belonging to the hearse, and following the undertaker’s men, arrived
with them at the spot appointed for the burial. Each person’s attention
was occupied. Monte Cristo saw nothing but the shadow, which no one else
observed. Twice the count left the ranks to see whether the object of
his interest had any concealed weapon beneath his clothes. When the
procession stopped, this shadow was recognized as Morrel, who, with his
coat buttoned up to his throat, his face livid, and convulsively
crushing his hat between his fingers, leaned against a tree, situated on
an elevation commanding the mausoleum, so that none of the funeral
details could escape his observation.

Monte Cristo heard and saw nothing, or rather he only saw Morrel, whose
calmness had a frightful effect on those who knew what was passing in
his heart.

“See,” said Beauchamp, pointing out Morrel to Debray. “What is he doing
up there?” And they called Château-Renaud’s attention to him.

“No, I do not,” replied Monte Cristo, without even knowing of what or to
whom he was speaking, so much was he occupied in watching Morrel, who
was holding his breath with emotion.

The funeral being over, the guests returned to Paris. Château-Renaud
looked for a moment for Morrel; but while they were watching the
departure of the count, Morrel had quitted his post, and Château-Renaud,
failing in his search, joined Debray and Beauchamp.

Monte Cristo concealed himself behind a large tomb and awaited the
arrival of Morrel, who by degrees approached the tomb now abandoned by
spectators and workmen. Morrel threw a glance around, but before it
reached the spot occupied by Monte Cristo the latter had advanced yet
nearer, still unperceived. The young man knelt down. The count, with
outstretched neck and glaring eyes, stood in an attitude ready to pounce
upon Morrel upon the first occasion. Morrel bent his head till it
touched the stone, then clutching the grating with both hands, he
murmured:

“I was looking for you, my friend.” Monte Cristo expected a burst of
passion, but he was deceived, for Morrel turning round, said calmly,—

The count withdrew without opposition, but it was only to place himself
in a situation where he could watch every movement of Morrel, who at
length arose, brushed the dust from his knees, and turned towards Paris,
without once looking back. He walked slowly down the Rue de la Roquette.
The count, dismissing his carriage, followed him about a hundred paces
behind. Maximilian crossed the canal and entered the Rue Meslay by the
boulevards.

Five minutes after the door had been closed on Morrel’s entrance, it was
again opened for the count. Julie was at the entrance of the garden,
where she was attentively watching Penelon, who, entering with zeal into
his profession of gardener, was very busy grafting some Bengal roses.
“Ah, count,” she exclaimed, with the delight manifested by every member
of the family whenever he visited the Rue Meslay.

Monte Cristo trembled from head to foot and as if his determination had
been taken with the rapidity of lightning, he struck one of the panes of
glass with his elbow; the glass was shivered to atoms, then withdrawing
the curtain he saw Morrel, who had been writing at his desk, bound from
his seat at the noise of the broken window.

And passing his hand through the broken glass, the count opened the
door. Morrel, evidently discomposed, came to meet Monte Cristo less with
the intention of receiving him than to exclude his entry.

“Are you hurt, sir?” coldly asked Morrel.

“I have already had the honor of telling you I was,” said Morrel.

“I am on the point of starting on a journey,” replied Morrel
disdainfully.

“I make a hasty resolution?” said Morrel, shrugging his shoulders; “is
there anything extraordinary in a journey?”

“Maximilian,” said the count, “let us both lay aside the mask we have
assumed. You no more deceive me with that false calmness than I impose
upon you with my frivolous solicitude. You can understand, can you not,
that to have acted as I have done, to have broken that glass, to have
intruded on the solitude of a friend—you can understand that, to have
done all this, I must have been actuated by real uneasiness, or rather
by a terrible conviction. Morrel, you are going to destroy yourself!”

“Indeed, count,” said Morrel, shuddering; “what has put this into your
head?”

“I tell you that you are about to destroy yourself,” continued the
count, “and here is proof of what I say;” and, approaching the desk, he
removed the sheet of paper which Morrel had placed over the letter he
had begun, and took the latter in his hands.

Morrel rushed forward to tear it from him, but Monte Cristo perceiving
his intention, seized his wrist with his iron grasp.

“Well,” said Morrel, changing his expression of calmness for one of
violence—“well, and if I do intend to turn this pistol against myself,
who shall prevent me—who will dare prevent me? All my hopes are
blighted, my heart is broken, my life a burden, everything around me is
sad and mournful; earth has become distasteful to me, and human voices
distract me. It is a mercy to let me die, for if I live I shall lose my
reason and become mad. When, sir, I tell you all this with tears of
heartfelt anguish, can you reply that I am wrong, can you prevent my
putting an end to my miserable existence? Tell me, sir, could you have
the courage to do so?”

“Yes, Morrel,” said Monte Cristo, with a calmness which contrasted
strangely with the young man’s excitement; “yes, I would do so.”

“You?” exclaimed Morrel, with increasing anger and reproach—“you, who
have deceived me with false hopes, who have cheered and soothed me with
vain promises, when I might, if not have saved her, at least have seen
her die in my arms! You, who pretend to understand everything, even the
hidden sources of knowledge,—and who enact the part of a guardian angel
upon earth, and could not even find an antidote to a poison administered
to a young girl! Ah, sir, indeed you would inspire me with pity, were
you not hateful in my eyes.”

“Morrel——”

“Yes; you tell me to lay aside the mask, and I will do so, be satisfied!
When you spoke to me at the cemetery, I answered you—my heart was
softened; when you arrived here, I allowed you to enter. But since you
abuse my confidence, since you have devised a new torture after I
thought I had exhausted them all, then, Count of Monte Cristo my
pretended benefactor—then, Count of Monte Cristo, the universal
guardian, be satisfied, you shall witness the death of your friend;” and
Morrel, with a maniacal laugh, again rushed towards the pistols.

“Prevent me, then!” replied Morrel, with another struggle, which, like
the first, failed in releasing him from the count’s iron grasp.

“Who am I?” repeated Monte Cristo. “Listen; I am the only man in the
world having the right to say to you, ‘Morrel, your father’s son shall
not die today;’” and Monte Cristo, with an expression of majesty and
sublimity, advanced with arms folded toward the young man, who,
involuntarily overcome by the commanding manner of this man, recoiled a
step.

“Because I am he who saved your father’s life when he wished to destroy
himself, as you do today—because I am the man who sent the purse to your
young sister, and the Pharaon to old Morrel—because I am the Edmond
Dantès who nursed you, a child, on my knees.”

Morrel made another step back, staggering, breathless, crushed; then all
his strength give way, and he fell prostrate at the feet of Monte
Cristo. Then his admirable nature underwent a complete and sudden
revulsion; he arose, rushed out of the room and to the stairs,
exclaiming energetically, “Julie, Julie—Emmanuel, Emmanuel!”

Monte Cristo endeavored also to leave, but Maximilian would have died
rather than relax his hold of the handle of the door, which he closed
upon the count. Julie, Emmanuel, and some of the servants, ran up in
alarm on hearing the cries of Maximilian. Morrel seized their hands, and
opening the door exclaimed in a voice choked with sobs:

Julie threw herself into the arms of the count; Emmanuel embraced him as
a guardian angel; Morrel again fell on his knees, and struck the ground
with his forehead. Then the iron-hearted man felt his heart swell in his
breast; a flame seemed to rush from his throat to his eyes, he bent his
head and wept. For a while nothing was heard in the room but a
succession of sobs, while the incense from their grateful hearts mounted
to heaven. Julie had scarcely recovered from her deep emotion when she
rushed out of the room, descended to the next floor, ran into the
drawing-room with childlike joy and raised the crystal globe which
covered the purse given by the unknown of the Allées de Meilhan.
Meanwhile, Emmanuel in a broken voice said to the count:

Then turning around, and seeing that Morrel, still on his knees, had
thrown himself into an armchair, he added in a low voice, pressing
Emmanuel’s hand significantly, “Watch over him.”

“Leave them,” said Monte Cristo. Then walking towards Morrel, he took
his hand; the tumultuous agitation of the young man was succeeded by a
profound stupor. Julie returned, holding the silken purse in her hands,
while tears of joy rolled down her cheeks, like dewdrops on the rose.

While announcing his departure, the count fixed his eyes on Morrel, and
remarked that the words, “I shall have left this country,” had failed to
rouse him from his lethargy. He then saw that he must make another
struggle against the grief of his friend, and taking the hands of
Emmanuel and Julie, which he pressed within his own, he said with the
mild authority of a father:

The count was alone with Morrel, who remained motionless as a statue.

“Oh, do not fear, my friend,” said Morrel, raising his head, and smiling
with a sweet expression on the count; “I shall no longer attempt my
life.”

“Ah,” exclaimed Morrel, interrupting the count, “you had only lost your
liberty, my father had only lost his fortune, but I have lost
Valentine.”

“Look at me,” said Monte Cristo, with that expression which sometimes
made him so eloquent and persuasive—“look at me. There are no tears in
my eyes, nor is there fever in my veins, yet I see you suffer—you,
Maximilian, whom I love as my own son. Well, does not this tell you that
in grief, as in life, there is always something to look forward to
beyond? Now, if I entreat, if I order you to live, Morrel, it is in the
conviction that one day you will thank me for having preserved your
life.”

“My friend, my father,” said Morrel with excitement, “have a care, I
again repeat, for the power you wield over me alarms me. Weigh your
words before you speak, for my eyes have already become brighter, and my
heart beats strongly; be cautious, or you will make me believe in
supernatural agencies. I must obey you, though you bade me call forth
the dead or walk upon the water.”

“Ah,” said Morrel, falling from the height of excitement to the abyss of
despair—“ah, you are playing with me, like those good, or rather selfish
mothers who soothe their children with honeyed words, because their
screams annoy them. No, my friend, I was wrong to caution you; do not
fear, I will bury my grief so deep in my heart, I will disguise it so,
that you shall not even care to sympathize with me. Adieu, my friend,
adieu!”

“Count, you render me sadder than before, if it be possible. You think
the result of this blow has been to produce an ordinary grief, and you
would cure it by an ordinary remedy—change of scene.” And Morrel dropped
his head with disdainful incredulity.

“Or?” repeated Morrel.

“Or, take care, Morrel, lest I call you ungrateful.”

“I feel so much pity towards you, Maximilian, that—listen to me
attentively—if I do not cure you in a month, to the day, to the very
hour, mark my words, Morrel, I will place loaded pistols before you, and
a cup of the deadliest Italian poison—a poison more sure and prompt than
that which has killed Valentine.”

“But you are sure you will promise me this?” said Morrel, intoxicated.

Morrel seized the count’s hand and kissed it; the count allowed him to
pay the homage he felt due to him.

“Haydée?” said Morrel, “what has become of her?”

“Besides, mother, why should you make up your mind that I am to be
killed? Has Lamoricière, that Ney of the South, been killed? Has
Changarnier been killed? Has Bedeau been killed? Has Morrel, whom we
know, been killed? Think of your joy, mother, when you see me return
with an embroidered uniform! I declare, I expect to look magnificent in
it, and chose that regiment only from vanity.”

“By the way, M. de Château-Renaud,” asked Beauchamp, “how is Morrel?”

“Oh,” he said, “he is mad!” And as though he feared that the walls of
the accursed house would crumble around him, he rushed into the street,
for the first time doubting whether he had the right to do as he had
done. “Oh, enough of this,—enough of this,” he cried; “let me save the
last.” On entering his house, he met Morrel, who wandered about like a
ghost awaiting the heavenly mandate for return to the tomb.

“Have you nothing more to do there?” asked Morrel.

“To seek me?” repeated Morrel, as if awakening from a dream.

“Oh, count.” said Julie, “will you restore him to us cured of his
melancholy?” Morrel turned away to conceal the confusion of his
countenance.

“I have a passport, and my clothes are ready packed,” said Morrel in his
tranquil but mournful manner.

“I am going wherever it may please the count to take me,” said Morrel,
with a smile full of grief; “I am under his orders for the next month.”

“Once more farewell, my dear sister; Emmanuel, adieu!” Morrel repeated.

“Restore my brother to peace and happiness,” whispered Julie to Monte
Cristo. And the count pressed her hand in reply, as he had done eleven
years before on the staircase leading to Morrel’s study.

Ten leagues were passed and not a single word was uttered. Morrel was
dreaming, and Monte Cristo was looking at the dreamer.

“Morrel,” said the count to him at length, “do you repent having
followed me?”

“If I thought happiness might await you in Paris, Morrel, I would have
left you there.”

“Maximilian,” said the count, “the friends that we have lost do not
repose in the bosom of the earth, but are buried deep in our hearts, and
it has been thus ordained that we may always be accompanied by them. I
have two friends, who in this way never depart from me; the one who gave
me being, and the other who conferred knowledge and intelligence on me.
Their spirits live in me. I consult them when doubtful, and if I ever do
any good, it is due to their beneficent counsels. Listen to the voice of
your heart, Morrel, and ask it whether you ought to preserve this
melancholy exterior towards me.”

Morrel was not insensible to that sensation of delight which is
generally experienced in passing rapidly through the air, and the wind
which occasionally raised the hair from his forehead seemed on the point
of dispelling momentarily the clouds collected there.

Monte Cristo gently smiled and said,—“I was there;” at the same time
pointing to the corner of a street. As he spoke, and in the very
direction he indicated, a groan, expressive of bitter grief, was heard,
and a woman was seen waving her hand to a passenger on board the vessel
about to sail. Monte Cristo looked at her with an emotion that must have
been remarked by Morrel had not his eyes been fixed on the vessel.

“Oh, heavens!” exclaimed Morrel, “I do not deceive myself—that young man
who is waving his hat, that youth in the uniform of a lieutenant, is
Albert de Morcerf!”

“I have to weep over the grave of my father,” replied Morrel in a broken
voice.

Morrel allowed his hand to fall into that which the count extended to
him; then with an inexpressibly sorrowful inclination of the head he
quitted the count and bent his steps to the east of the city. Monte
Cristo remained on the same spot until Maximilian was out of sight; he
then walked slowly towards the Allées de Meilhan to seek out a small
house with which our readers were made familiar at the beginning of this
story.

On landing, the count turned towards the cemetery, where he felt sure of
finding Morrel. He, too, ten years ago, had piously sought out a tomb,
and sought it vainly. He, who returned to France with millions, had been
unable to find the grave of his father, who had perished from hunger.
Morrel had indeed placed a cross over the spot, but it had fallen down
and the grave-digger had burnt it, as he did all the old wood in the
churchyard.

The worthy merchant had been more fortunate. Dying in the arms of his
children, he had been by them laid by the side of his wife, who had
preceded him in eternity by two years. Two large slabs of marble, on
which were inscribed their names, were placed on either side of a little
enclosure, railed in, and shaded by four cypress-trees. Morrel was
leaning against one of these, mechanically fixing his eyes on the
graves. His grief was so profound that he was nearly unconscious.

“The dead are everywhere,” said Morrel; “did you not yourself tell me so
as we left Paris?”

“No, you will not forget it, because you are a man of honor, Morrel,
because you have taken an oath, and are about to do so again.”

“I have known a man much more unfortunate than you, Morrel.”

“Listen, Morrel, and pay attention to what I am about to tell you. I
knew a man who like you had fixed all his hopes of happiness upon a
woman. He was young, he had an old father whom he loved, a betrothed
bride whom he adored. He was about to marry her, when one of the
caprices of fate,—which would almost make us doubt the goodness of
Providence, if that Providence did not afterwards reveal itself by
proving that all is but a means of conducting to an end,—one of those
caprices deprived him of his mistress, of the future of which he had
dreamed (for in his blindness he forgot he could only read the present),
and cast him into a dungeon.”

“Ah,” said Morrel, “one quits a dungeon in a week, a month, or a year.”

“He remained there fourteen years, Morrel,” said the count, placing his
hand on the young man’s shoulder. Maximilian shuddered.

“Fourteen years!” repeated the count. “During that time he had many
moments of despair. He also, Morrel, like you, considered himself the
unhappiest of men.”

“Well?” asked Morrel.

“My father, too, is dead,” said Morrel.

“Oh!” exclaimed Morrel.

“He was, then, a more unhappy son than you, Morrel, for he could not
even find his father’s grave.”

“You are deceived, Morrel, that woman——”

“Worse than that, she was faithless, and had married one of the
persecutors of her betrothed. You see, then, Morrel, that he was a more
unhappy lover than you.”

“On the 5th of October, Morrel, I shall expect you at the Island of
Monte Cristo. On the 4th a yacht will wait for you in the port of
Bastia, it will be called the Eurus. You will give your name to the
captain, who will bring you to me. It is understood—is it not?”

“Child,” replied the count, “not to know the value of a man’s word! I
have told you twenty times that if you wish to die on that day, I will
assist you. Morrel, farewell!”

Morrel accompanied the count to the harbor. The white steam was
ascending like a plume of feathers from the black chimney. The steamer
soon disappeared, and in an hour afterwards, as the count had said, was
scarcely distinguishable in the horizon amidst the fogs of the night.

Monte Cristo perceived that the young man had turned around; indeed,
Morrel saw with surprise that the men who had brought him had left
without being paid, or uttering a word. Already the sound of their oars
might be heard as they returned to the yacht.

Morrel looked at the count with surprise. “Count,” he said, “you are not
the same here as in Paris.”

“You are wrong, Morrel; I was really happy.”

“Oh,” exclaimed Morrel, with a glance full of bitter reproach, “do you
think it possible that I could be?”

“Listen,” said the count. “Do you understand the meaning of my words?
You cannot take me for a commonplace man, a mere rattle, emitting a
vague and senseless noise. When I ask you if you are consoled, I speak
to you as a man for whom the human heart has no secrets. Well, Morrel,
let us both examine the depths of your heart. Do you still feel the same
feverish impatience of grief which made you start like a wounded lion?
Have you still that devouring thirst which can only be appeased in the
grave? Are you still actuated by the regret which drags the living to
the pursuit of death; or are you only suffering from the prostration of
fatigue and the weariness of hope deferred? Has the loss of memory
rendered it impossible for you to weep? Oh, my dear friend, if this be
the case,—if you can no longer weep, if your frozen heart be dead, if
you put all your trust in God, then, Maximilian, you are consoled—do not
complain.”

“Count,” said Morrel, in a firm and at the same time soft voice, “listen
to me, as to a man whose thoughts are raised to heaven, though he
remains on earth; I come to die in the arms of a friend. Certainly,
there are people whom I love. I love my sister Julie,—I love her husband
Emmanuel; but I require a strong mind to smile on my last moments. My
sister would be bathed in tears and fainting; I could not bear to see
her suffer. Emmanuel would tear the weapon from my hand, and alarm the
house with his cries. You, count, who are more than mortal, will, I am
sure, lead me to death by a pleasant path, will you not?”

“No, indeed,—I am calm,” said Morrel, giving his hand to the count; “my
pulse does not beat slower or faster than usual. No, I feel that I have
reached the goal, and I will go no farther. You told me to wait and
hope; do you know what you did, unfortunate adviser? I waited a month,
or rather I suffered for a month! I did hope (man is a poor wretched
creature), I did hope. What I cannot tell,—something wonderful, an
absurdity, a miracle,—of what nature he alone can tell who has mingled
with our reason that folly we call hope. Yes, I did wait—yes, I did
hope, count, and during this quarter of an hour we have been talking
together, you have unconsciously wounded, tortured my heart, for every
word you have uttered proved that there was no hope for me. Oh, count, I
shall sleep calmly, deliciously in the arms of death.”

Morrel uttered these words with an energy which made the count shudder.

“My friend,” continued Morrel, “you named the fifth of October as the
end of the period of waiting,—today is the fifth of October,” he took
out his watch, “it is now nine o’clock,—I have yet three hours to live.”

“Be it so,” said the count, “come.” Morrel mechanically followed the
count, and they had entered the grotto before he perceived it. He felt a
carpet under his feet, a door opened, perfumes surrounded him, and a
brilliant light dazzled his eyes. Morrel hesitated to advance; he
dreaded the enervating effect of all that he saw. Monte Cristo drew him
in gently.

Morrel smiled. “As you please,” he said; “death is always death,—that is
forgetfulness, repose, exclusion from life, and therefore from grief.”

He sat down, and Monte Cristo placed himself opposite to him. They were
in the marvellous dining-room before described, where the statues had
baskets on their heads always filled with fruits and flowers. Morrel had
looked carelessly around, and had probably noticed nothing.

“Count,” said Morrel, “you are the epitome of all human knowledge, and
you seem like a being descended from a wiser and more advanced world
than ours.”

Monte Cristo looked upon Morrel with indescribable tenderness. “Yes,” he
said, “yes, doubtless it is painful, if you violently break the outer
covering which obstinately begs for life. If you plunge a dagger into
your flesh, if you insinuate a bullet into your brain, which the least
shock disorders,—then certainly, you will suffer pain, and you will
repent quitting a life for a repose you have bought at so dear a price.”

Morrel extended his hand. “Now I understand,” he said, “why you had me
brought here to this desolate spot, in the midst of the ocean, to this
subterranean palace; it was because you loved me, was it not, count? It
was because you loved me well enough to give me one of those sweet means
of death of which we were speaking; a death without agony, a death which
allows me to fade away while pronouncing Valentine’s name and pressing
your hand.”

“Yes, you have guessed rightly, Morrel,” said the count, “that is what I
intended.”

“No,” replied Morrel.

“Not even me?” asked the count with deep emotion. Morrel’s clear eye was
for the moment clouded, then it shone with unusual lustre, and a large
tear rolled down his cheek.

“Oh, I entreat you,” exclaimed Morrel in a low voice, “do not speak
another word, count; do not prolong my punishment.”

Then he said aloud: “Listen, Morrel, I see your grief is great, but
still you do not like to risk your soul.” Morrel smiled sadly.

“I mean, that you wish to quit life because you do not understand all
the enjoyments which are the fruits of a large fortune. Morrel, I
possess nearly a hundred millions and I give them to you; with such a
fortune you can attain every wish. Are you ambitious? Every career is
open to you. Overturn the world, change its character, yield to mad
ideas, be even criminal—but live.”

“Count, I have your word,” said Morrel coldly; then taking out his
watch, he added, “It is half-past eleven.”

“Morrel, can you intend it in my house, under my very eyes?”

“It is well,” said Monte Cristo whose countenance brightened at these
words; “you wish it—you are inflexible. Yes, as you said, you are indeed
wretched and a miracle alone can cure you. Sit down, Morrel, and wait.”

Morrel obeyed; the count arose, and unlocking a closet with a key
suspended from his gold chain, took from it a little silver casket,
beautifully carved and chased, the corners of which represented four
bending figures, similar to the Caryatides, the forms of women, symbols
of the angels aspiring to heaven.

The count took out a small quantity of this with a gilt spoon, and
offered it to Morrel, fixing a long steadfast glance upon him. It was
then observable that the substance was greenish.

“I thank you from the depths of my heart,” said the young man, taking
the spoon from the hands of Monte Cristo. The count took another spoon,
and again dipped it into the golden box. “What are you going to do, my
friend?” asked Morrel, arresting his hand.

“Well, the fact is, Morrel, I was thinking that I too am weary of life,
and since an opportunity presents itself——”

And slowly, though without any hesitation, only waiting to press the
count’s hand fervently, he swallowed the mysterious substance offered by
Monte Cristo. Then they were both silent. Ali, mute and attentive,
brought the pipes and coffee, and disappeared. By degrees, the light of
the lamps gradually faded in the hands of the marble statues which held
them, and the perfumes appeared less powerful to Morrel. Seated opposite
to him, Monte Cristo watched him in the shadow, and Morrel saw nothing
but the bright eyes of the count. An overpowering sadness took
possession of the young man, his hands relaxed their hold, the objects
in the room gradually lost their form and color, and his disturbed
vision seemed to perceive doors and curtains open in the wall.

He made a last effort to extend his hand, but it fell powerless beside
him. Then it appeared to him that Monte Cristo smiled, not with the
strange and fearful expression which had sometimes revealed to him the
secrets of his heart, but with the benevolent kindness of a father for a
child. At the same time the count appeared to increase in stature, his
form, nearly double its usual height, stood out in relief against the
red tapestry, his black hair was thrown back, and he stood in the
attitude of an avenging angel. Morrel, overpowered, turned around in the
armchair; a delicious torpor permeated every vein. A change of ideas
presented themselves to his brain, like a new design on the
kaleidoscope. Enervated, prostrate, and breathless, he became
unconscious of outward objects; he seemed to be entering that vague
delirium preceding death. He wished once again to press the count’s
hand, but his own was immovable. He wished to articulate a last
farewell, but his tongue lay motionless and heavy in his throat, like a
stone at the mouth of a sepulchre. Involuntarily his languid eyes
closed, and still through his eyelashes a well-known form seemed to move
amid the obscurity with which he thought himself enveloped.

Monte Cristo pointed out Morrel to the young woman, who advanced towards
him with clasped hands and a smile upon her lips.

“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Valentine, who was supporting the head of
Morrel on her shoulder, “do you not see how pale she is? Do you not see
how she suffers?”

An hour had nearly passed, during which Valentine, breathless and
motionless, watched steadfastly over Morrel. At length she felt his
heart beat, a faint breath played upon his lips, a slight shudder,
announcing the return of life, passed through the young man’s frame. At
length his eyes opened, but they were at first fixed and expressionless;
then sight returned, and with it feeling and grief.

“Dearest,” exclaimed Valentine, with her adorable smile, “awake, and
look at me!” Morrel uttered a loud exclamation, and frantic, doubtful,
dazzled, as though by a celestial vision, he fell upon his knees.

The next morning at daybreak, Valentine and Morrel were walking arm-in-
arm on the seashore, Valentine relating how Monte Cristo had appeared in
her room, explained everything, revealed the crime, and, finally, how he
had saved her life by enabling her to simulate death.

Morrel soon perceived a man standing among the rocks, apparently
awaiting a sign from them to advance, and pointed him out to Valentine.

“Do you wish to speak to us?” asked Morrel.

Morrel opened the letter, and read:

“There is a felucca for you at anchor. Jacopo will carry you to Leghorn,
where Monsieur Noirtier awaits his granddaughter, whom he wishes to
bless before you lead her to the altar. All that is in this grotto, my
friend, my house in the Champs-Élysées, and my château at Tréport, are
the marriage gifts bestowed by Edmond Dantès upon the son of his old
master, Morrel. Mademoiselle de Villefort will share them with you; for
I entreat her to give to the poor the immense fortune reverting to her
from her father, now a madman, and her brother who died last September
with his mother. Tell the angel who will watch over your future destiny,
Morrel, to pray sometimes for a man, who, like Satan, thought himself
for an instant equal to God, but who now acknowledges with Christian
humility that God alone possesses supreme power and infinite wisdom.
Perhaps those prayers may soften the remorse he feels in his heart. As
for you, Morrel, this is the secret of my conduct towards you. There is
neither happiness nor misery in the world; there is only the comparison
of one state with another, nothing more. He who has felt the deepest
grief is best able to experience supreme happiness. We must have felt
what it is to die, Morrel, that we may appreciate the enjoyments of
living.

Morrel looked around uneasily.

“Gone,” said Morrel; “gone!—adieu, my friend—adieu, my father!”

“Who can say whether we shall ever see them again?” said Morrel with
tearful eyes.

