“Could you ever have credited such a thing, my dear Danglars?” asked M.
Morrel, as, on his return to the port for the purpose of gleaning fresh
tidings of Dantès, from M. de Villefort, the assistant procureur, he
overtook his supercargo and Caderousse. “Could you have believed such a
thing possible?”

“I will let you know that directly I have seen M. de Villefort, whom I
shall endeavor to interest in Edmond’s favor. I am aware he is a furious
royalist; but, in spite of that, and of his being king’s attorney, he is
a man like ourselves, and I fancy not a bad sort of one.”

“Ah,” said the Marquise de Saint-Méran, a woman with a stern, forbidding
eye, though still noble and distinguished in appearance, despite her
fifty years—“ah, these revolutionists, who have driven us from those
very possessions they afterwards purchased for a mere trifle during the
Reign of Terror, would be compelled to own, were they here, that all
true devotion was on our side, since we were content to follow the
fortunes of a falling monarch, while they, on the contrary, made their
fortune by worshipping the rising sun; yes, yes, they could not help
admitting that the king, for whom we sacrificed rank, wealth, and
station was truly our ‘Louis the well-beloved,’ while their wretched
usurper has been, and ever will be, to them their evil genius, their
‘Napoleon the accursed.’ Am I not right, Villefort?”

“Never mind, dearest mother,” said a young and lovely girl, with a
profusion of light brown hair, and eyes that seemed to float in liquid
crystal, “’tis all my fault for seizing upon M. de Villefort, so as to
prevent his listening to what you said. But there—now take him—he is
your own for as long as you like. M. Villefort, I beg to remind you my
mother speaks to you.”

“If the marquise will deign to repeat the words I but imperfectly
caught, I shall be delighted to answer,” said M. de Villefort.

“Never mind, Renée,” replied the marquise, with a look of tenderness
that seemed out of keeping with her harsh dry features; but, however all
other feelings may be withered in a woman’s nature, there is always one
bright smiling spot in the desert of her heart, and that is the shrine
of maternal love. “I forgive you. What I was saying, Villefort, was,
that the Bonapartists had not our sincerity, enthusiasm, or devotion.”

“Nay, madame; I would place each of these heroes on his right
pedestal—that of Robespierre on his scaffold in the Place Louis Quinze;
that of Napoleon on the column of the Place Vendôme. The only difference
consists in the opposite character of the equality advocated by these
two men; one is the equality that elevates, the other is the equality
that degrades; one brings a king within reach of the guillotine, the
other elevates the people to a level with the throne. Observe,” said
Villefort, smiling, “I do not mean to deny that both these men were
revolutionary scoundrels, and that the 9th Thermidor and the 4th of
April, in the year 1814, were lucky days for France, worthy of being
gratefully remembered by every friend to monarchy and civil order; and
that explains how it comes to pass that, fallen, as I trust he is
forever, Napoleon has still retained a train of parasitical satellites.
Still, marquise, it has been so with other usurpers—Cromwell, for
instance, who was not half so bad as Napoleon, had his partisans and
advocates.”

“Do you know, Villefort, that you are talking in a most dreadfully
revolutionary strain? But I excuse it, it is impossible to expect the
son of a Girondin to be free from a small spice of the old leaven.” A
deep crimson suffused the countenance of Villefort.

“Suffer me, also, madame,” replied Villefort, “to add my earnest request
to Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran’s, that you will kindly allow the veil of
oblivion to cover and conceal the past. What avails recrimination over
matters wholly past recall? For my own part, I have laid aside even the
name of my father, and altogether disown his political principles. He
was—nay, probably may still be—a Bonapartist, and is called Noirtier; I,
on the contrary, am a staunch royalist, and style myself de Villefort.
Let what may remain of revolutionary sap exhaust itself and die away
with the old trunk, and condescend only to regard the young shoot which
has started up at a distance from the parent tree, without having the
power, any more than the wish, to separate entirely from the stock from
which it sprung.”

“Bravo, Villefort!” cried the marquis; “excellently well said! Come,
now, I have hopes of obtaining what I have been for years endeavoring to
persuade the marquise to promise; namely, a perfect amnesty and
forgetfulness of the past.”

“With all my heart,” replied the marquise; “let the past be forever
forgotten. I promise you it affords me as little pleasure to revive it
as it does you. All I ask is, that Villefort will be firm and inflexible
for the future in his political principles. Remember, also, Villefort,
that we have pledged ourselves to his majesty for your fealty and strict
loyalty, and that at our recommendation the king consented to forget the
past, as I do” (and here she extended to him her hand)—“as I now do at
your entreaty. But bear in mind, that should there fall in your way
anyone guilty of conspiring against the government, you will be so much
the more bound to visit the offence with rigorous punishment, as it is
known you belong to a suspected family.”

“Alas, madame,” returned Villefort, “my profession, as well as the times
in which we live, compels me to be severe. I have already successfully
conducted several public prosecutions, and brought the offenders to
merited punishment. But we have not done with the thing yet.”

“So much the better. As Villefort observes, it is a great act of folly
to have left such a man between Corsica, where he was born, and Naples,
of which his brother-in-law is king, and face to face with Italy, the
sovereignty of which he coveted for his son.”

“Unfortunately,” said Villefort, “there are the treaties of 1814, and we
cannot molest Napoleon without breaking those compacts.”

“Well,” said the marquise, “it seems probable that, by the aid of the
Holy Alliance, we shall be rid of Napoleon; and we must trust to the
vigilance of M. de Villefort to purify Marseilles of his partisans. The
king is either a king or no king; if he be acknowledged as sovereign of
France, he should be upheld in peace and tranquillity; and this can best
be effected by employing the most inflexible agents to put down every
attempt at conspiracy—’tis the best and surest means of preventing
mischief.”

“Unfortunately, madame,” answered Villefort, “the strong arm of the law
is not called upon to interfere until the evil has taken place.”

“Oh, M. de Villefort,” cried a beautiful young creature, daughter to the
Comte de Salvieux, and the cherished friend of Mademoiselle de Saint-
Méran, “do try and get up some famous trial while we are at Marseilles.
I never was in a law-court; I am told it is so very amusing!”

“For shame, M. de Villefort!” said Renée, becoming quite pale; “don’t
you see how you are frightening us?—and yet you laugh.”

“Gracious heavens, M. de Villefort,” said Renée, becoming more and more
terrified; “you surely are not in earnest.”

“What a splendid business that last case of yours was, my dear
Villefort!” remarked a third; “I mean the trial of the man for murdering
his father. Upon my word, you killed him ere the executioner had laid
his hand upon him.”

“I don’t know anything about that,” replied Renée; “but, M. de
Villefort, you have promised me—have you not?—always to show mercy to
those I plead for.”

“Make yourself quite easy on that point,” answered Villefort, with one
of his sweetest smiles; “you and I will always consult upon our
verdicts.”

“Cedant arma togæ,” said Villefort with a bow.

“Dear, good Renée,” whispered Villefort, as he gazed with unutterable
tenderness on the lovely speaker.

“Let us hope, my child,” cried the marquis, “that M. de Villefort may
prove the moral and political physician of this province; if so, he will
have achieved a noble work.”

“Madame,” replied Villefort, with a mournful smile, “I have already had
the honor to observe that my father has—at least, I hope so—abjured his
past errors, and that he is, at the present moment, a firm and zealous
friend to religion and order—a better royalist, possibly, than his son;
for he has to atone for past dereliction, while I have no other impulse
than warm, decided preference and conviction.” Having made this well-
turned speech, Villefort looked carefully around to mark the effect of
his oratory, much as he would have done had he been addressing the bench
in open court.

“Do you know, my dear Villefort,” cried the Comte de Salvieux, “that is
exactly what I myself said the other day at the Tuileries, when
questioned by his majesty’s principal chamberlain touching the
singularity of an alliance between the son of a Girondin and the
daughter of an officer of the Duc de Condé; and I assure you he seemed
fully to comprehend that this mode of reconciling political differences
was based upon sound and excellent principles. Then the king, who,
without our suspecting it, had overheard our conversation, interrupted
us by saying, ‘Villefort’—observe that the king did not pronounce the
word Noirtier, but, on the contrary, placed considerable emphasis on
that of Villefort—‘Villefort,’ said his majesty, ‘is a young man of
great judgment and discretion, who will be sure to make a figure in his
profession; I like him much, and it gave me great pleasure to hear that
he was about to become the son-in-law of the Marquis and Marquise de
Saint-Méran. I should myself have recommended the match, had not the
noble marquis anticipated my wishes by requesting my consent to it.’”

“Is it possible the king could have condescended so far as to express
himself so favorably of me?” asked the enraptured Villefort.

“For my part, dear mother,” interposed Renée, “I trust your wishes will
not prosper, and that Providence will only permit petty offenders, poor
debtors, and miserable cheats to fall into M. de Villefort’s hands,—then
I shall be contented.”

At this moment, and as though the utterance of Villefort’s wish had
sufficed to effect its accomplishment, a servant entered the room, and
whispered a few words in his ear. Villefort immediately rose from table
and quitted the room upon the plea of urgent business; he soon, however,
returned, his whole face beaming with delight. Renée regarded him with
fond affection; and certainly his handsome features, lit up as they then
were with more than usual fire and animation, seemed formed to excite
the innocent admiration with which she gazed on her graceful and
intelligent lover.

“You were wishing just now,” said Villefort, addressing her, “that I
were a doctor instead of a lawyer. Well, I at least resemble the
disciples of Esculapius in one thing [people spoke in this style in
1815], that of not being able to call a day my own, not even that of my
betrothal.”

“I will read you the letter containing the accusation, at least,” said
Villefort:

“He is in safe custody,” answered Villefort; “and rely upon it, if the
letter is found, he will not be likely to be trusted abroad again,
unless he goes forth under the especial protection of the headsman.”

“Oh, Villefort!” cried Renée, clasping her hands, and looking towards
her lover with piteous earnestness, “be merciful on this the day of our
betrothal.”

“Never mind that foolish girl, Villefort,” said the marquise. “She will
soon get over these things.” So saying, Madame de Saint-Méran extended
her dry bony hand to Villefort, who, while imprinting a son-in-law’s
respectful salute on it, looked at Renée, as much as to say, “I must try
and fancy ’tis your dear hand I kiss, as it should have been.”

“Nay, madame, I pray you pardon this little traitor. I promise you that
to make up for her want of loyalty, I will be most inflexibly severe;”
then casting an expressive glance at his betrothed, which seemed to say,
“Fear not, for your dear sake my justice shall be tempered with mercy,”
and receiving a sweet and approving smile in return, Villefort departed
with paradise in his heart.

No sooner had Villefort left the salon, than he assumed the grave air of
a man who holds the balance of life and death in his hands. Now, in
spite of the nobility of his countenance, the command of which, like a
finished actor, he had carefully studied before the glass, it was by no
means easy for him to assume an air of judicial severity. Except the
recollection of the line of politics his father had adopted, and which
might interfere, unless he acted with the greatest prudence, with his
own career, Gérard de Villefort was as happy as a man could be. Already
rich, he held a high official situation, though only twenty-seven. He
was about to marry a young and charming woman, whom he loved, not
passionately, but reasonably, as became a deputy attorney of the king;
and besides her personal attractions, which were very great,
Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran’s family possessed considerable political
influence, which they would, of course, exert in his favor. The dowry of
his wife amounted to fifty thousand crowns, and he had, besides, the
prospect of seeing her fortune increased to half a million at her
father’s death. These considerations naturally gave Villefort a feeling
of such complete felicity that his mind was fairly dazzled in its
contemplation.

At the door he met the commissary of police, who was waiting for him.
The sight of this officer recalled Villefort from the third heaven to
earth; he composed his face, as we have before described, and said, “I
have read the letter, sir, and you have acted rightly in arresting this
man; now inform me what you have discovered concerning him and the
conspiracy.”

At this moment, and as Villefort had arrived at the corner of the Rue
des Conseils, a man, who seemed to have been waiting for him,
approached; it was M. Morrel.

“Ah, M. de Villefort,” cried he, “I am delighted to see you. Some of
your people have committed the strangest mistake—they have just arrested
Edmond Dantès, mate of my vessel.”

“I know it, monsieur,” replied Villefort, “and I am now going to examine
him.”

“Oh,” said Morrel, carried away by his friendship, “you do not know him,
and I do. He is the most estimable, the most trustworthy creature in the
world, and I will venture to say, there is not a better seaman in all
the merchant service. Oh, M. de Villefort, I beseech your indulgence for
him.”

Villefort, as we have seen, belonged to the aristocratic party at
Marseilles, Morrel to the plebeian; the first was a royalist, the other
suspected of Bonapartism. Villefort looked disdainfully at Morrel, and
replied coldly:

“I entreat you, M. de Villefort, be, as you always are, kind and
equitable, and give him back to us soon.” This give us sounded
revolutionary in the deputy’s ears.

As he had now arrived at the door of his own house, which adjoined the
Palais de Justice, he entered, after having, coldly saluted the
shipowner, who stood, as if petrified, on the spot where Villefort had
left him. The antechamber was full of police agents and gendarmes, in
the midst of whom, carefully watched, but calm and smiling, stood the
prisoner. Villefort traversed the antechamber, cast a side glance at
Dantès, and taking a packet which a gendarme offered him, disappeared,
saying, “Bring in the prisoner.”

Rapid as had been Villefort’s glance, it had served to give him an idea
of the man he was about to interrogate. He had recognized intelligence
in the high forehead, courage in the dark eye and bent brow, and
frankness in the thick lips that showed a set of pearly teeth.
Villefort’s first impression was favorable; but he had been so often
warned to mistrust first impulses, that he applied the maxim to the
impression, forgetting the difference between the two words. He stifled,
therefore, the feelings of compassion that were rising, composed his
features, and sat down, grim and sombre, at his desk. An instant after
Dantès entered. He was pale, but calm and collected, and saluting his
judge with easy politeness, looked round for a seat, as if he had been
in M. Morrel’s salon. It was then that he encountered for the first time
Villefort’s look,—that look peculiar to the magistrate, who, while
seeming to read the thoughts of others, betrays nothing of his own.

“Who and what are you?” demanded Villefort, turning over a pile of
papers, containing information relative to the prisoner, that a police
agent had given to him on his entry, and that, already, in an hour’s
time, had swelled to voluminous proportions, thanks to the corrupt
espionage of which “the accused” is always made the victim.

“Your age?” continued Villefort.

“I was at the festival of my marriage, monsieur,” said the young man,
his voice slightly tremulous, so great was the contrast between that
happy moment and the painful ceremony he was now undergoing; so great
was the contrast between the sombre aspect of M. de Villefort and the
radiant face of Mercédès.

“Yes, monsieur; I am on the point of marrying a young girl I have been
attached to for three years.” Villefort, impassive as he was, was struck
with this coincidence; and the tremulous voice of Dantès, surprised in
the midst of his happiness, struck a sympathetic chord in his own
bosom—he also was on the point of being married, and he was summoned
from his own happiness to destroy that of another. “This philosophic
reflection,” thought he, “will make a great sensation at M. de Saint-
Méran’s;” and he arranged mentally, while Dantès awaited further
questions, the antithesis by which orators often create a reputation for
eloquence. When this speech was arranged, Villefort turned to Dantès.

“It is reported your political opinions are extreme,” said Villefort,
who had never heard anything of the kind, but was not sorry to make this
inquiry, as if it were an accusation.

“My political opinions!” replied Dantès. “Alas, sir, I never had any
opinions. I am hardly nineteen; I know nothing; I have no part to play.
If I obtain the situation I desire, I shall owe it to M. Morrel. Thus
all my opinions—I will not say public, but private—are confined to these
three sentiments,—I love my father, I respect M. Morrel, and I adore
Mercédès. This, sir, is all I can tell you, and you see how
uninteresting it is.” As Dantès spoke, Villefort gazed at his ingenuous
and open countenance, and recollected the words of Renée, who, without
knowing who the culprit was, had besought his indulgence for him. With
the deputy’s knowledge of crime and criminals, every word the young man
uttered convinced him more and more of his innocence. This lad, for he
was scarcely a man,—simple, natural, eloquent with that eloquence of the
heart never found when sought for; full of affection for everybody,
because he was happy, and because happiness renders even the wicked
good—extended his affection even to his judge, spite of Villefort’s
severe look and stern accent. Dantès seemed full of kindness.

“Pardieu!” said Villefort, “he is a noble fellow. I hope I shall gain
Renée’s favor easily by obeying the first command she ever imposed on
me. I shall have at least a pressure of the hand in public, and a sweet
kiss in private.” Full of this idea, Villefort’s face became so joyous,
that when he turned to Dantès, the latter, who had watched the change on
his physiognomy, was smiling also.

“Sir,” said Villefort, “have you any enemies, at least, that you know.”

“You are wrong; you should always strive to see clearly around you. You
seem a worthy young man; I will depart from the strict line of my duty
to aid you in discovering the author of this accusation. Here is the
paper; do you know the writing?” As he spoke, Villefort drew the letter
from his pocket, and presented it to Dantès. Dantès read it. A cloud
passed over his brow as he said:

“No, monsieur, I do not know the writing, and yet it is tolerably plain.
Whoever did it writes well. I am very fortunate,” added he, looking
gratefully at Villefort, “to be examined by such a man as you; for this
envious person is a real enemy.” And by the rapid glance that the young
man’s eyes shot forth, Villefort saw how much energy lay hid beneath
this mildness.

“Now,” said the deputy, “answer me frankly, not as a prisoner to a
judge, but as one man to another who takes an interest in him, what
truth is there in the accusation contained in this anonymous letter?”
And Villefort threw disdainfully on his desk the letter Dantès had just
given back to him.

“Speak, monsieur,” said Villefort. Then, internally, “If Renée could see
me, I hope she would be satisfied, and would no longer call me a
decapitator.”

“Ah,” said Villefort, “this seems to me the truth. If you have been
culpable, it was imprudence, and this imprudence was in obedience to the
orders of your captain. Give up this letter you have brought from Elba,
and pass your word you will appear should you be required, and go and
rejoin your friends.

“To Monsieur Noirtier, Rue Coq-Héron, Paris.” Had a thunderbolt fallen
into the room, Villefort could not have been more stupefied. He sank
into his seat, and hastily turning over the packet, drew forth the fatal
letter, at which he glanced with an expression of terror.

“No,” replied Villefort; “a faithful servant of the king does not know
conspirators.”

“Yes; but you knew the name of the person to whom it was addressed,”
said Villefort.

“Have you shown this letter to anyone?” asked Villefort, becoming still
more pale.

“And that was too much, far too much,” murmured Villefort. Villefort’s
brow darkened more and more, his white lips and clenched teeth filled
Dantès with apprehension. After reading the letter, Villefort covered
his face with his hands.

“Oh,” said Dantès timidly, “what is the matter?” Villefort made no
answer, but raised his head at the expiration of a few seconds, and
again perused the letter.

“No,” said Villefort, rising hastily; “stay where you are. It is for me
to give orders here, and not you.”

“I want none; it was a temporary indisposition. Attend to yourself;
answer me.” Dantès waited, expecting a question, but in vain. Villefort
fell back on his chair, passed his hand over his brow, moist with
perspiration, and, for the third time, read the letter.

“Oh, if he knows the contents of this!” murmured he, “and that Noirtier
is the father of Villefort, I am lost!” And he fixed his eyes upon
Edmond as if he would have penetrated his thoughts.

“In heaven’s name!” cried the unhappy young man, “if you doubt me,
question me; I will answer you.” Villefort made a violent effort, and in
a tone he strove to render firm:

“Well, I must detain you some time longer, but I will strive to make it
as short as possible. The principal charge against you is this letter,
and you see——” Villefort approached the fire, cast it in, and waited
until it was entirely consumed.

“Listen,” continued Villefort; “you can now have confidence in me after
what I have done.”

“I promise.” It was Villefort who seemed to entreat, and the prisoner
who reassured him.

Villefort rang. A police agent entered. Villefort whispered some words
in his ear, to which the officer replied by a motion of his head.

“Follow him,” said Villefort to Dantès. Dantès saluted Villefort and
retired. Hardly had the door closed when Villefort threw himself half-
fainting into a chair.

He was conducted to a tolerably neat chamber, but grated and barred, and
its appearance, therefore, did not greatly alarm him; besides, the words
of Villefort, who seemed to interest himself so much, resounded still in
his ears like a promise of freedom. It was four o’clock when Dantès was
placed in this chamber. It was, as we have said, the 1st of March, and
the prisoner was soon buried in darkness. The obscurity augmented the
acuteness of his hearing; at the slightest sound he rose and hastened to
the door, convinced they were about to liberate him, but the sound died
away, and Dantès sank again into his seat. At last, about ten o’clock,
and just as Dantès began to despair, steps were heard in the corridor, a
key turned in the lock, the bolts creaked, the massy oaken door flew
open, and a flood of light from two torches pervaded the apartment.

“I believe so.” The conviction that they came from M. de Villefort
relieved all Dantès’ apprehensions; he advanced calmly, and placed
himself in the centre of the escort. A carriage waited at the door, the
coachman was on the box, and a police officer sat beside him.

The most vague and wild thoughts passed through his mind. The boat they
were in could not make a long voyage; there was no vessel at anchor
outside the harbor; he thought, perhaps, they were going to leave him on
some distant point. He was not bound, nor had they made any attempt to
handcuff him; this seemed a good augury. Besides, had not the deputy,
who had been so kind to him, told him that provided he did not pronounce
the dreaded name of Noirtier, he had nothing to apprehend? Had not
Villefort in his presence destroyed the fatal letter, the only proof
against him?

“And so, in spite of M. de Villefort’s promises?”

“I do not know what M. de Villefort promised you,” said the gendarme,
“but I know we are taking you to the Château d’If. But what are you
doing? Help, comrades, help!”

For a moment the idea of struggling crossed his mind, and of so ending
the unexpected evil that had overtaken him. But he bethought him of M.
de Villefort’s promise; and, besides, death in a boat from the hand of a
gendarme seemed too terrible. He remained motionless, but gnashing his
teeth and wringing his hands with fury.

The day passed thus; he scarcely tasted food, but walked round and round
the cell like a wild beast in its cage. One thought in particular
tormented him: namely, that during his journey hither he had sat so
still, whereas he might, a dozen times, have plunged into the sea, and,
thanks to his powers of swimming, for which he was famous, have gained
the shore, concealed himself until the arrival of a Genoese or Spanish
vessel, escaped to Spain or Italy, where Mercédès and his father could
have joined him. He had no fears as to how he should live—good seamen
are welcome everywhere. He spoke Italian like a Tuscan, and Spanish like
a Castilian; he would have been free, and happy with Mercédès and his
father, whereas he was now confined in the Château d’If, that
impregnable fortress, ignorant of the future destiny of his father and
Mercédès; and all this because he had trusted to Villefort’s promise.
The thought was maddening, and Dantès threw himself furiously down on
his straw. The next morning at the same hour, the jailer came again.

Villefort had, as we have said, hastened back to Madame de Saint-Méran’s
in the Place du Grand Cours, and on entering the house found that the
guests whom he had left at table were taking coffee in the salon. Renée
was, with all the rest of the company, anxiously awaiting him, and his
entrance was followed by a general exclamation.

“Marquise,” said Villefort, approaching his future mother-in-law, “I
request your pardon for thus leaving you. Will the marquis honor me by a
few moments’ private conversation?”

“Ah, it is really a serious matter, then?” asked the marquis, remarking
the cloud on Villefort’s brow.

“Alas,” returned Villefort, “I must!”

“Now, then,” said Villefort, placing the letter in his pocketbook, “I
must have another!”

Villefort hastily quitted the apartment, but reflecting that the sight
of the deputy procureur running through the streets would be enough to
throw the whole city into confusion, he resumed his ordinary pace. At
his door he perceived a figure in the shadow that seemed to wait for
him. It was Mercédès, who, hearing no news of her lover, had come
unobserved to inquire after him.

As Villefort drew near, she advanced and stood before him. Dantès had
spoken of Mercédès, and Villefort instantly recognized her. Her beauty
and high bearing surprised him, and when she inquired what had become of
her lover, it seemed to him that she was the judge, and he the accused.

“The young man you speak of,” said Villefort abruptly, “is a great
criminal, and I can do nothing for him, mademoiselle.” Mercédès burst
into tears, and, as Villefort strove to pass her, again addressed him.

“I do not know; he is no longer in my hands,” replied Villefort.

And desirous of putting an end to the interview, he pushed by her, and
closed the door, as if to exclude the pain he felt. But remorse is not
thus banished; like Virgil’s wounded hero, he carried the arrow in his
wound, and, arrived at the salon, Villefort uttered a sigh that was
almost a sob, and sank into a chair.

Then the first pangs of an unending torture seized upon his heart. The
man he sacrificed to his ambition, that innocent victim immolated on the
altar of his father’s faults, appeared to him pale and threatening,
leading his affianced bride by the hand, and bringing with him remorse,
not such as the ancients figured, furious and terrible, but that slow
and consuming agony whose pangs are intensified from hour to hour up to
the very moment of death. Then he had a moment’s hesitation. He had
frequently called for capital punishment on criminals, and owing to his
irresistible eloquence they had been condemned, and yet the slightest
shadow of remorse had never clouded Villefort’s brow, because they were
guilty; at least, he believed so; but here was an innocent man whose
happiness he had destroyed. In this case he was not the judge, but the
executioner.

As he thus reflected, he felt the sensation we have described, and which
had hitherto been unknown to him, arise in his bosom, and fill him with
vague apprehensions. It is thus that a wounded man trembles
instinctively at the approach of the finger to his wound until it be
healed, but Villefort’s was one of those that never close, or if they
do, only close to reopen more agonizing than ever. If at this moment the
sweet voice of Renée had sounded in his ears pleading for mercy, or the
fair Mercédès had entered and said, “In the name of God, I conjure you
to restore me my affianced husband,” his cold and trembling hands would
have signed his release; but no voice broke the stillness of the
chamber, and the door was opened only by Villefort’s valet, who came to
tell him that the travelling carriage was in readiness.

Villefort rose, or rather sprang, from his chair, hastily opened one of
the drawers of his desk, emptied all the gold it contained into his
pocket, stood motionless an instant, his hand pressed to his head,
muttered a few inarticulate sounds, and then, perceiving that his
servant had placed his cloak on his shoulders, he sprang into the
carriage, ordering the postilions to drive to M. de Saint-Méran’s. The
hapless Dantès was doomed.

As the marquis had promised, Villefort found the marquise and Renée in
waiting. He started when he saw Renée, for he fancied she was again
about to plead for Dantès. Alas, her emotions were wholly personal: she
was thinking only of Villefort’s departure.

She loved Villefort, and he left her at the moment he was about to
become her husband. Villefort knew not when he should return, and Renée,
far from pleading for Dantès, hated the man whose crime separated her
from her lover.

Villefort, after having received M. de Salvieux’s letter, embraced
Renée, kissed the marquise’s hand, and shaken that of the marquis,
started for Paris along the Aix road.

We will leave Villefort on the road to Paris, travelling—thanks to
trebled fees—with all speed, and passing through two or three
apartments, enter at the Tuileries the little room with the arched
window, so well known as having been the favorite closet of Napoleon and
Louis XVIII., and now of Louis Philippe.

“Sire,” said Blacas, who had for a moment the hope of sacrificing
Villefort to his own profit, “I am compelled to tell you that these are
not mere rumors destitute of foundation which thus disquiet me; but a
serious-minded man, deserving all my confidence, and charged by me to
watch over the south” (the duke hesitated as he pronounced these words),
“has arrived by post to tell me that a great peril threatens the king,
and so I hastened to you, sire.”

M. de Blacas pondered deeply between the confident monarch and the
truthful minister. Villefort, who did not choose to reveal the whole
secret, lest another should reap all the benefit of the disclosure, had
yet communicated enough to cause him the greatest uneasiness.

“No; but strongly recommends M. de Villefort, and begs me to present him
to your majesty.”

“M. de Villefort!” cried the king, “is the messenger’s name M. de
Villefort?”

“Blacas, my friend, you have but limited comprehension. I told you
Villefort was ambitious, and to attain this ambition Villefort would
sacrifice everything, even his father.”

M. de Blacas returned as speedily as he had departed, but in the
antechamber he was forced to appeal to the king’s authority. Villefort’s
dusty garb, his costume, which was not of courtly cut, excited the
susceptibility of M. de Brezé, who was all astonishment at finding that
this young man had the audacity to enter before the king in such attire.
The duke, however, overcame all difficulties with a word—his majesty’s
order; and, in spite of the protestations which the master of ceremonies
made for the honor of his office and principles, Villefort was
introduced.

The king was seated in the same place where the duke had left him. On
opening the door, Villefort found himself facing him, and the young
magistrate’s first impulse was to pause.

“Come in, M. de Villefort,” said the king, “come in.”

Villefort bowed, and advancing a few steps, waited until the king should
interrogate him.

“M. de Villefort,” said Louis XVIII., “the Duc de Blacas assures me you
have some interesting information to communicate.”

“Speak as fully as you please, sir,” said the king, who began to give
way to the emotion which had showed itself in Blacas’s face and affected
Villefort’s voice. “Speak, sir, and pray begin at the beginning; I like
order in everything.”

“Sire,” said Villefort, “I will render a faithful report to your
majesty, but I must entreat your forgiveness if my anxiety leads to some
obscurity in my language.” A glance at the king after this discreet and
subtle exordium, assured Villefort of the benignity of his august
auditor, and he went on:

“Yes, yes; but let us talk of this plot, M. de Villefort.”

“Ah, here is M. Dandré!” cried de Blacas. At this instant the minister
of police appeared at the door, pale, trembling, and as if ready to
faint. Villefort was about to retire, but M. de Blacas, taking his hand,
restrained him.

“What ails you, baron?” he exclaimed. “You appear quite aghast. Has your
uneasiness anything to do with what M. de Blacas has told me, and M. de
Villefort has just confirmed?” M. de Blacas moved suddenly towards the
baron, but the fright of the courtier pleaded for the forbearance of the
statesman; and besides, as matters were, it was much more to his
advantage that the prefect of police should triumph over him than that
he should humiliate the prefect.

“But——” said Villefort, and then suddenly checking himself, he was
silent; then he continued, “Your pardon, sire,” he said, bowing, “my
zeal carried me away. Will your majesty deign to excuse me?”

“Sire,” said Villefort, “the usurper is detested in the south; and it
seems to me that if he ventured into the south, it would be easy to
raise Languedoc and Provence against him.”

“And Dauphiné, sir?” inquired the king, of Villefort. “Do you think it
possible to rouse that as well as Provence?”

The minister quailed before this outburst of sarcasm. M. de Blacas wiped
the moisture from his brow. Villefort smiled within himself, for he felt
his increased importance.

“Approach, M. de Villefort,” resumed the king, addressing the young man,
who, motionless and breathless, was listening to a conversation on which
depended the destiny of a kingdom. “Approach, and tell monsieur that it
is possible to know beforehand all that he has not known.”

“Really impossible! Yes—that is a great word, sir. Unfortunately, there
are great words, as there are great men; I have measured them. Really
impossible for a minister who has an office, agents, spies, and fifteen
hundred thousand francs for secret service money, to know what is going
on at sixty leagues from the coast of France! Well, then, see, here is a
gentleman who had none of these resources at his disposal—a gentleman,
only a simple magistrate, who learned more than you with all your
police, and who would have saved my crown, if, like you, he had the
power of directing a telegraph.” The look of the minister of police was
turned with concentrated spite on Villefort, who bent his head in modest
triumph.

“I do not mean that for you, Blacas,” continued Louis XVIII.; “for if
you have discovered nothing, at least you have had the good sense to
persevere in your suspicions. Any other than yourself would have
considered the disclosure of M. de Villefort insignificant, or else
dictated by venal ambition.” These words were an allusion to the
sentiments which the minister of police had uttered with so much
confidence an hour before.

Villefort understood the king’s intent. Any other person would, perhaps,
have been overcome by such an intoxicating draught of praise; but he
feared to make for himself a mortal enemy of the police minister,
although he saw that Dandré was irrevocably lost. In fact, the minister,
who, in the plenitude of his power, had been unable to unearth
Napoleon’s secret, might in despair at his own downfall interrogate
Dantès and so lay bare the motives of Villefort’s plot. Realizing this,
Villefort came to the rescue of the crest-fallen minister, instead of
aiding to crush him.

“Sire,” said Villefort, “the suddenness of this event must prove to your
majesty that the issue is in the hands of Providence; what your majesty
is pleased to attribute to me as profound perspicacity is simply owing
to chance, and I have profited by that chance, like a good and devoted
servant—that’s all. Do not attribute to me more than I deserve, sire,
that your majesty may never have occasion to recall the first opinion
you have been pleased to form of me.” The minister of police thanked the
young man by an eloquent look, and Villefort understood that he had
succeeded in his design; that is to say, that without forfeiting the
gratitude of the king, he had made a friend of one on whom, in case of
necessity, he might rely.

“The affair in the Rue Saint-Jacques!” exclaimed Villefort, unable to
repress an exclamation. Then, suddenly pausing, he added, “Your pardon,
sire, but my devotion to your majesty has made me forget, not the
respect I have, for that is too deeply engraved in my heart, but the
rules of etiquette.”

“On the contrary, sir,—on the contrary,” said Louis XVIII., “this affair
seems to me to have a decided connection with that which occupies our
attention, and the death of General Quesnel will, perhaps, put us on the
direct track of a great internal conspiracy.” At the name of General
Quesnel, Villefort trembled.

“Everything points to the conclusion, sire,” said the minister of
police, “that death was not the result of suicide, as we first believed,
but of assassination. General Quesnel, it appears, had just left a
Bonapartist club when he disappeared. An unknown person had been with
him that morning, and made an appointment with him in the Rue Saint-
Jacques; unfortunately, the general’s valet, who was dressing his hair
at the moment when the stranger entered, heard the street mentioned, but
did not catch the number.” As the police minister related this to the
king, Villefort, who looked as if his very life hung on the speaker’s
lips, turned alternately red and pale. The king looked towards him.

“Do you not think with me, M. de Villefort, that General Quesnel, whom
they believed attached to the usurper, but who was really entirely
devoted to me, has perished the victim of a Bonapartist ambush?”

“It is probable, sire,” replied Villefort. “But is this all that is
known?”

“On his track?” said Villefort.

“Yes, the servant has given his description. He is a man of from fifty
to fifty-two years of age, dark, with black eyes covered with shaggy
eyebrows, and a thick moustache. He was dressed in a blue frock-coat,
buttoned up to the chin, and wore at his button-hole the rosette of an
officer of the Legion of Honor. Yesterday a person exactly corresponding
with this description was followed, but he was lost sight of at the
corner of the Rue de la Jussienne and the Rue Coq-Héron.” Villefort
leaned on the back of an armchair, for as the minister of police went on
speaking he felt his legs bend under him; but when he learned that the
unknown had escaped the vigilance of the agent who followed him, he
breathed again.

“Continue to seek for this man, sir,” said the king to the minister of
police; “for if, as I am all but convinced, General Quesnel, who would
have been so useful to us at this moment, has been murdered, his
assassins, Bonapartists or not, shall be cruelly punished.” It required
all Villefort’s coolness not to betray the terror with which this
declaration of the king inspired him.

“We shall see. I will no longer detain you, M. de Villefort, for you
must be fatigued after so long a journey; go and rest. Of course you
stopped at your father’s?” A feeling of faintness came over Villefort.

“Never mind, sir, we will not forget you; make your mind easy. In the
meanwhile” (the king here detached the cross of the Legion of Honor
which he usually wore over his blue coat, near the cross of St. Louis,
above the order of Notre-Dame-du-Mont-Carmel and St. Lazare, and gave it
to Villefort)—“in the meanwhile take this cross.”

“Sire,” said Villefort, “your majesty mistakes; this is an officer’s
cross.”

“Ma foi!” said Louis XVIII., “take it, such as it is, for I have not the
time to procure you another. Blacas, let it be your care to see that the
brevet is made out and sent to M. de Villefort.” Villefort’s eyes were
filled with tears of joy and pride; he took the cross and kissed it.

“Sire,” replied Villefort, bowing, “in an hour I shall have quitted
Paris.”

“Ah, sir,” said the minister of police to Villefort, as they left the
Tuileries, “you entered by luck’s door—your fortune is made.”

“Will it be long first?” muttered Villefort, saluting the minister,
whose career was ended, and looking about him for a hackney-coach. One
passed at the moment, which he hailed; he gave his address to the
driver, and springing in, threw himself on the seat, and gave loose to
dreams of ambition.

Ten minutes afterwards Villefort reached his hotel, ordered horses to be
ready in two hours, and asked to have his breakfast brought to him. He
was about to begin his repast when the sound of the bell rang sharp and
loud. The valet opened the door, and Villefort heard someone speak his
name.

“Well,” said Villefort, “what is it?—Who rang?—Who asked for me?”

“And how dressed?” asked Villefort quickly.

“It is he!” said Villefort, turning pale.

“Father!” cried Villefort, “then I was not deceived; I felt sure it must
be you.”

“Leave us, Germain,” said Villefort. The servant quitted the apartment
with evident signs of astonishment.

M. Noirtier—for it was, indeed, he who entered—looked after the servant
until the door was closed, and then, fearing, no doubt, that he might be
overheard in the antechamber, he opened the door again, nor was the
precaution useless, as appeared from the rapid retreat of Germain, who
proved that he was not exempt from the sin which ruined our first
parents. M. Noirtier then took the trouble to close and bolt the
antechamber door, then that of the bedchamber, and then extended his
hand to Villefort, who had followed all his motions with surprise which
he could not conceal.

“My dear father,” said Villefort, “I am, on the contrary, delighted; but
I so little expected your visit, that it has somewhat overcome me.”

“To you; and which I discovered in the pocket-book of the messenger. Had
that letter fallen into the hands of another, you, my dear father, would
probably ere this have been shot.” Villefort’s father laughed.

“The king! I thought he was philosopher enough to allow that there was
no murder in politics. In politics, my dear fellow, you know, as well as
I do, there are no men, but ideas—no feelings, but interests; in
politics we do not kill a man, we only remove an obstacle, that is all.
Would you like to know how matters have progressed? Well, I will tell
you. It was thought reliance might be placed in General Quesnel; he was
recommended to us from the Island of Elba; one of us went to him, and
invited him to the Rue Saint-Jacques, where he would find some friends.
He came there, and the plan was unfolded to him for leaving Elba, the
projected landing, etc. When he had heard and comprehended all to the
fullest extent, he replied that he was a royalist. Then all looked at
each other,—he was made to take an oath, and did so, but with such an
ill grace that it was really tempting Providence to swear thus, and yet,
in spite of that, the general was allowed to depart free—perfectly free.
Yet he did not return home. What could that mean? why, my dear fellow,
that on leaving us he lost his way, that’s all. A murder? really,
Villefort, you surprise me. You, a deputy procureur, to found an
accusation on such bad premises! Did I ever say to you, when you were
fulfilling your character as a royalist, and cut off the head of one of
my party, ‘My son, you have committed a murder?’ No, I said, ‘Very well,
sir, you have gained the victory; tomorrow, perchance, it will be our
turn.’”

“Indeed!” replied Villefort, looking at his father with astonishment,
“you really do seem very well informed.”

“Devotion!” said Villefort, with a sneer.

And Villefort’s father extended his hand to the bell-rope, to summon the
servant whom his son had not called. Villefort caught his arm.

“True,” said Noirtier, looking carelessly around him, “true, if this
person were not on his guard, as he is;” and he added with a smile, “He
will consequently make a few changes in his personal appearance.” At
these words he rose, and put off his frock-coat and cravat, went towards
a table on which lay his son’s toilet articles, lathered his face, took
a razor, and, with a firm hand, cut off the compromising whiskers.
Villefort watched him with alarm not devoid of admiration.

His whiskers cut off, Noirtier gave another turn to his hair; took,
instead of his black cravat, a colored neckerchief which lay at the top
of an open portmanteau; put on, in lieu of his blue and high-buttoned
frock-coat, a coat of Villefort’s of dark brown, and cut away in front;
tried on before the glass a narrow-brimmed hat of his son’s, which
appeared to fit him perfectly, and, leaving his cane in the corner where
he had deposited it, he took up a small bamboo switch, cut the air with
it once or twice, and walked about with that easy swagger which was one
of his principal characteristics.

“No, father,” stammered Villefort; “at least, I hope not.”

“Oh, rely on me,” said Villefort.

Villefort shook his head.

Noirtier left the room when he had finished, with the same calmness that
had characterized him during the whole of this remarkable and trying
conversation. Villefort, pale and agitated, ran to the window, put aside
the curtain, and saw him pass, cool and collected, by two or three ill-
looking men at the corner of the street, who were there, perhaps, to
arrest a man with black whiskers, and a blue frock-coat, and hat with
broad brim.

Villefort stood watching, breathless, until his father had disappeared
at the Rue Bussy. Then he turned to the various articles he had left
behind him, put the black cravat and blue frock-coat at the bottom of
the portmanteau, threw the hat into a dark closet, broke the cane into
small bits and flung it in the fire, put on his travelling-cap, and
calling his valet, checked with a look the thousand questions he was
ready to ask, paid his bill, sprang into his carriage, which was ready,
learned at Lyons that Bonaparte had entered Grenoble, and in the midst
of the tumult which prevailed along the road, at length reached
Marseilles, a prey to all the hopes and fears which enter into the heart
of man with ambition and its first successes.

Louis XVIII. made but a faint attempt to parry this unexpected blow; the
monarchy he had scarcely reconstructed tottered on its precarious
foundation, and at a sign from the emperor the incongruous structure of
ancient prejudices and new ideas fell to the ground. Villefort,
therefore, gained nothing save the king’s gratitude (which was rather
likely to injure him at the present time) and the cross of the Legion of
Honor, which he had the prudence not to wear, although M. de Blacas had
duly forwarded the brevet.

Napoleon would, doubtless, have deprived Villefort of his office had it
not been for Noirtier, who was all powerful at court, and thus the
Girondin of ’93 and the Senator of 1806 protected him who so lately had
been his protector. All Villefort’s influence barely enabled him to
stifle the secret Dantès had so nearly divulged. The king’s procureur
alone was deprived of his office, being suspected of royalism.

Villefort retained his place, but his marriage was put off until a more
favorable opportunity. If the emperor remained on the throne, Gérard
required a different alliance to aid his career; if Louis XVIII.
returned, the influence of M. de Saint-Méran, like his own, could be
vastly increased, and the marriage be still more suitable. The deputy
procureur was, therefore, the first magistrate of Marseilles, when one
morning his door opened, and M. Morrel was announced.

Anyone else would have hastened to receive him; but Villefort was a man
of ability, and he knew this would be a sign of weakness. He made Morrel
wait in the antechamber, although he had no one with him, for the simple
reason that the king’s procureur always makes everyone wait, and after
passing a quarter of an hour in reading the papers, he ordered M. Morrel
to be admitted.

Morrel expected Villefort would be dejected; he found him as he had
found him six weeks before, calm, firm, and full of that glacial
politeness, that most insurmountable barrier which separates the well-
bred from the vulgar man.

He had entered Villefort’s office expecting that the magistrate would
tremble at the sight of him; on the contrary, he felt a cold shudder all
over him when he saw Villefort sitting there with his elbow on his desk,
and his head leaning on his hand. He stopped at the door; Villefort
gazed at him as if he had some difficulty in recognizing him; then,
after a brief interval, during which the honest shipowner turned his hat
in his hands,

“M. Morrel, I believe?” said Villefort.

Villefort by a strong effort sought to control himself. “What is his
name?” said he. “Tell me his name.”

Villefort would probably have rather stood opposite the muzzle of a
pistol at five-and-twenty paces than have heard this name spoken; but he
did not blanch.

“Yes, monsieur.” Villefort opened a large register, then went to a
table, from the table turned to his registers, and then, turning to
Morrel,

Had Morrel been a more quick-sighted man, or better versed in these
matters, he would have been surprised at the king’s procureur answering
him on such a subject, instead of referring him to the governors of the
prison or the prefect of the department. But Morrel, disappointed in his
expectations of exciting fear, was conscious only of the other’s
condescension. Villefort had calculated rightly.

“Monsieur,” returned Villefort, “I was then a royalist, because I
believed the Bourbons not only the heirs to the throne, but the chosen
of the nation. The miraculous return of Napoleon has conquered me, the
legitimate monarch is he who is loved by his people.”

“Wait a moment,” said Villefort, turning over the leaves of a register;
“I have it—a sailor, who was about to marry a young Catalan girl. I
recollect now; it was a very serious charge.”

“Do not be too hasty, M. Morrel,” replied Villefort. “The order of
imprisonment came from high authority, and the order for his liberation
must proceed from the same source; and, as Napoleon has scarcely been
reinstated a fortnight, the letters have not yet been forwarded.”

“Well, M. de Villefort, how would you advise me to act?” asked he.

“With the greatest pleasure. Dantès was then guilty, and now he is
innocent, and it is as much my duty to free him as it was to condemn
him.” Villefort thus forestalled any danger of an inquiry, which,
however improbable it might be, if it did take place would leave him
defenceless.

“Sit down there,” said Villefort, giving up his place to Morrel, “and
write what I dictate.”

Villefort shuddered at the suggestion; but he had gone too far to draw
back. Dantès must be crushed to gratify Villefort’s ambition.

Villefort dictated a petition, in which, from an excellent intention, no
doubt, Dantès’ patriotic services were exaggerated, and he was made out
one of the most active agents of Napoleon’s return. It was evident that
at the sight of this document the minister would instantly release him.
The petition finished, Villefort read it aloud.

“The best thing I can do will be to certify the truth of the contents of
your petition.” And, sitting down, Villefort wrote the certificate at
the bottom.

“I will do whatever is necessary.” This assurance delighted Morrel, who
took leave of Villefort, and hastened to announce to old Dantès that he
would soon see his son.

As for Villefort, instead of sending to Paris, he carefully preserved
the petition that so fearfully compromised Dantès, in the hopes of an
event that seemed not unlikely,—that is, a second restoration. Dantès
remained a prisoner, and heard not the noise of the fall of Louis
XVIII.’s throne, or the still more tragic destruction of the empire.

Twice during the Hundred Days had Morrel renewed his demand, and twice
had Villefort soothed him with promises. At last there was Waterloo, and
Morrel came no more; he had done all that was in his power, and any
fresh attempt would only compromise himself uselessly.

Louis XVIII. remounted the throne; Villefort, to whom Marseilles had
become filled with remorseful memories, sought and obtained the
situation of king’s procureur at Toulouse, and a fortnight afterwards he
married Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran, whose father now stood higher at
court than ever.

“M. Villefort. See him, and hear what he says.”

“M. Villefort is no longer at Marseilles; he is now at Toulouse.”

“Had M. de Villefort any cause of personal dislike to you?”

Rage supplanted religious fervor. Dantès uttered blasphemies that made
his jailer recoil with horror, dashed himself furiously against the
walls of his prison, wreaked his anger upon everything, and chiefly upon
himself, so that the least thing,—a grain of sand, a straw, or a breath
of air that annoyed him, led to paroxysms of fury. Then the letter that
Villefort had showed to him recurred to his mind, and every line gleamed
forth in fiery letters on the wall like the mene, mene, tekel upharsin
of Belshazzar. He told himself that it was the enmity of man, and not
the vengeance of Heaven, that had thus plunged him into the deepest
misery. He consigned his unknown persecutors to the most horrible
tortures he could imagine, and found them all insufficient, because
after torture came death, and after death, if not repose, at least the
boon of unconsciousness.

“De Villefort!” The abbé burst into a fit of laughter, while Dantès
gazed on him in utter astonishment.

“Yes, his father,” replied the abbé; “his right name was Noirtier de
Villefort.”

At this instant a bright light shot through the mind of Dantès, and
cleared up all that had been dark and obscure before. The change that
had come over Villefort during the examination, the destruction of the
letter, the exacted promise, the almost supplicating tones of the
magistrate, who seemed rather to implore mercy than to pronounce
punishment,—all returned with a stunning force to his memory. He cried
out, and staggered against the wall like a drunken man, then he hurried
to the opening that led from the abbé’s cell to his own, and said, “I
must be alone, to think over all this.”

It was fourteen years, day for day, since Dantès’ arrest. He was
nineteen when he entered the Château d’If; he was thirty-three when he
escaped. A sorrowful smile passed over his face; he asked himself what
had become of Mercédès, who must believe him dead. Then his eyes lighted
up with hatred as he thought of the three men who had caused him so long
and wretched a captivity. He renewed against Danglars, Fernand, and
Villefort the oath of implacable vengeance he had made in his dungeon.

“The next day Mercédès came to implore the protection of M. de
Villefort; she did not obtain it, however, and went to visit the old
man; when she saw him so miserable and heart-broken, having passed a
sleepless night, and not touched food since the previous day, she wished
him to go with her that she might take care of him; but the old man
would not consent. ‘No,’ was the old man’s reply, ‘I will not leave this
house, for my poor dear boy loves me better than anything in the world;
and if he gets out of prison he will come and see me the first thing,
and what would he think if I did not wait here for him?’ I heard all
this from the window, for I was anxious that Mercédès should persuade
the old man to accompany her, for his footsteps over my head night and
day did not leave me a moment’s repose.”

“Mercédès was at first in the deepest despair at the blow which deprived
her of Edmond. I have told you of her attempts to propitiate M. de
Villefort, her devotion to the elder Dantès. In the midst of her
despair, a new affliction overtook her. This was the departure of
Fernand—of Fernand, whose crime she did not know, and whom she regarded
as her brother. Fernand went, and Mercédès remained alone.

“And M. de Villefort?” asked the abbé.

And they both entered M. de Boville’s study. Everything was here
arranged in perfect order; each register had its number, each file of
papers its place. The inspector begged the Englishman to seat himself in
an armchair, and placed before him the register and documents relative
to the Château d’If, giving him all the time he desired for the
examination, while De Boville seated himself in a corner, and began to
read his newspaper. The Englishman easily found the entries relative to
the Abbé Faria; but it seemed that the history which the inspector had
related interested him greatly, for after having perused the first
documents he turned over the leaves until he reached the deposition
respecting Edmond Dantès. There he found everything arranged in due
order,—the accusation, examination, Morrel’s petition, M. de Villefort’s
marginal notes. He folded up the accusation quietly, and put it as
quietly in his pocket; read the examination, and saw that the name of
Noirtier was not mentioned in it; perused, too, the application dated
10th April, 1815, in which Morrel, by the deputy procureur’s advice,
exaggerated with the best intentions (for Napoleon was then on the
throne) the services Dantès had rendered to the imperial cause—services
which Villefort’s certificates rendered indisputable. Then he saw
through the whole thing. This petition to Napoleon, kept back by
Villefort, had become, under the second restoration, a terrible weapon
against him in the hands of the king’s attorney. He was no longer
astonished when he searched on to find in the register this note, placed
in a bracket against his name:

He compared the writing in the bracket with the writing of the
certificate placed beneath Morrel’s petition, and discovered that the
note in the bracket was the same writing as the certificate—that is to
say, was in Villefort’s handwriting.

“Ah, I know her by name!” exclaimed Albert; “she is said to possess as
much wit and cleverness as beauty. I was to have been presented to her
when I met her at Madame Villefort’s ball.”

“Humiliating as such a confession is, I am. But I dined at M. de
Villefort’s, and lawyers always give you very bad dinners. You would
think they felt some remorse; did you ever remark that?”

“An old gentleman,” continued the concierge, “a staunch follower of the
Bourbons; he had an only daughter, who married M. de Villefort, who had
been the king’s attorney at Nîmes, and afterwards at Versailles.”

“No, monsieur, I swear to you, by my hopes of salvation, I will tell you
all, for the Abbé Busoni himself only knew a part of my secret; but, I
pray you, go away from that plane-tree. The moon is just bursting
through the clouds, and there, standing where you do, and wrapped in
that cloak that conceals your figure, you remind me of M. de Villefort.”

“What!” cried Monte Cristo, “it was M. de Villefort?”

“And this king’s attorney was named Villefort?” asked Monte Cristo
carelessly.

“‘Every revolution has its catastrophes,’ returned M. de Villefort;
‘your brother has been the victim of this. It is a misfortune, and
government owes nothing to his family. If we are to judge by all the
vengeance that the followers of the usurper exercised on the partisans
of the king, when, in their turn, they were in power, your brother would
be today, in all probability, condemned to death. What has happened is
quite natural, and in conformity with the law of reprisals.’

“‘All these Corsicans are mad, on my honor,’ replied M. de Villefort;
‘they fancy that their countryman is still emperor. You have mistaken
the time, you should have told me this two months ago, it is too late
now. Go now, at once, or I shall have you put out.’

“For three months I watched M. de Villefort, for three months he took
not a step out-of-doors without my following him. At length I discovered
that he went mysteriously to Auteuil. I followed him thither, and I saw
him enter the house where we now are, only, instead of entering by the
great door that looks into the street, he came on horseback, or in his
carriage, left the one or the other at the little inn, and entered by
the gate you see there.”

“As I had nothing more to do at Versailles, I went to Auteuil, and
gained all the information I could. If I wished to surprise him, it was
evident this was the spot to lie in wait for him. The house belonged, as
the concierge informed your excellency, to M. de Saint-Méran,
Villefort’s father-in-law. M. de Saint-Méran lived at Marseilles, so
that this country house was useless to him, and it was reported to be
let to a young widow, known only by the name of ‘the Baroness.’

“One evening, as I was looking over the wall, I saw a young and handsome
woman who was walking alone in that garden, which was not overlooked by
any windows, and I guessed that she was awaiting M. de Villefort. When
she was sufficiently near for me to distinguish her features, I saw she
was from eighteen to nineteen, tall and very fair. As she had a loose
muslin dress on and as nothing concealed her figure, I saw she would ere
long become a mother. A few moments after, the little door was opened
and a man entered. The young woman hastened to meet him. They threw
themselves into each other’s arms, embraced tenderly, and returned
together to the house. The man was M. de Villefort; I fully believed
that when he went out in the night he would be forced to traverse the
whole of the garden alone.”

“That evening,” continued Bertuccio, “I could have killed the procureur,
but as I was not sufficiently acquainted with the neighborhood, I was
fearful of not killing him on the spot, and that if his cries were
overheard I might be taken; so I put it off until the next occasion, and
in order that nothing should escape me, I took a chamber looking into
the street bordered by the wall of the garden. Three days after, about
seven o’clock in the evening, I saw a servant on horseback leave the
house at full gallop, and take the road to Sèvres. I concluded that he
was going to Versailles, and I was not deceived. Three hours later, the
man returned covered with dust, his errand was performed, and two
minutes after, another man on foot, muffled in a mantle, opened the
little door of the garden, which he closed after him. I descended
rapidly; although I had not seen Villefort’s face, I recognized him by
the beating of my heart. I crossed the street, and stopped at a post
placed at the angle of the wall, and by means of which I had once before
looked into the garden.

“This time I did not content myself with looking, but I took my knife
out of my pocket, felt that the point was sharp, and sprang over the
wall. My first care was to run to the door; he had left the key in it,
taking the simple precaution of turning it twice in the lock. Nothing,
then, preventing my escape by this means, I examined the grounds. The
garden was long and narrow; a stretch of smooth turf extended down the
middle, and at the corners were clumps of trees with thick and massy
foliage, that made a background for the shrubs and flowers. In order to
go from the door to the house, or from the house to the door, M. de
Villefort would be obliged to pass by one of these clumps of trees.

“It was the end of September; the wind blew violently. The faint
glimpses of the pale moon, hidden momentarily by masses of dark clouds
that were sweeping across the sky, whitened the gravel walks that led to
the house, but were unable to pierce the obscurity of the thick
shrubberies, in which a man could conceal himself without any fear of
discovery. I hid myself in the one nearest to the path Villefort must
take, and scarcely was I there when, amidst the gusts of wind, I fancied
I heard groans; but you know, or rather you do not know, your
excellency, that he who is about to commit an assassination fancies that
he hears low cries perpetually ringing in his ears. Two hours passed
thus, during which I imagined I heard moans repeatedly. Midnight struck.
As the last stroke died away, I saw a faint light shine through the
windows of the private staircase by which we have just descended. The
door opened, and the man in the mantle reappeared.

“The terrible moment had come, but I had so long been prepared for it
that my heart did not fail in the least. I drew my knife from my pocket
again, opened it, and made ready to strike. The man in the mantle
advanced towards me, but as he drew near I saw that he had a weapon in
his hand. I was afraid, not of a struggle, but of a failure. When he was
only a few paces from me, I saw that what I had taken for a weapon was
only a spade. I was still unable to divine for what reason M. de
Villefort had this spade in his hands, when he stopped close to the
thicket where I was, glanced round, and began to dig a hole in the
earth. I then perceived that he was hiding something under his mantle,
which he laid on the grass in order to dig more freely. Then, I confess,
curiosity mingled with hatred; I wished to see what Villefort was going
to do there, and I remained motionless, holding my breath. Then an idea
crossed my mind, which was confirmed when I saw the procureur lift from
under his mantle a box, two feet long, and six or eight inches deep. I
let him place the box in the hole he had made, then, while he stamped
with his feet to remove all traces of his occupation, I rushed on him
and plunged my knife into his breast, exclaiming:

“As a punishment for the crime I had committed,” answered Bertuccio.
“Oh, those Villeforts are an accursed race!”

“And now,” resumed Bertuccio, “your excellency may, perhaps, be able to
comprehend that this place, which I revisit for the first time—this
garden, the actual scene of my crime—must have given rise to reflections
of no very agreeable nature, and produced that gloom and depression of
spirits which excited the notice of your excellency, who was pleased to
express a desire to know the cause. At this instant a shudder passes
over me as I reflect that possibly I am now standing on the very grave
in which lies M. de Villefort, by whose hand the ground was dug to
receive the corpse of his child.”

“My good friend, I can only repeat the words addressed to you by the
Abbé Busoni. Villefort merited punishment for what he had done to you,
and, perhaps, to others. Benedetto, if still living, will become the
instrument of divine retribution in some way or other, and then be duly
punished in his turn. As far as you yourself are concerned, I see but
one point in which you are really guilty. Ask yourself, wherefore, after
rescuing the infant from its living grave, you did not restore it to its
mother? There was the crime, Bertuccio—that was where you became really
culpable.”

“Oh, yes; I will listen, monsieur, for I am most curious to hear what
explanation you will give. These two gentlemen shall decide between us;
but, first, I will state the case to them. Gentlemen,” continued the
baroness, “among the ten horses in the stables of Baron Danglars, are
two that belong exclusively to me—a pair of the handsomest and most
spirited creatures to be found in Paris. But to you, at least, M.
Debray, I need not give a further description, because to you my
beautiful pair of dappled grays were well known. Well, I had promised
Madame de Villefort the loan of my carriage to drive tomorrow to the
Bois; but when my coachman goes to fetch the grays from the stables they
are gone—positively gone. No doubt M. Danglars has sacrificed them to
the selfish consideration of gaining some thousands of paltry francs.
Oh, what a detestable crew they are, these mercenary speculators!”

“And I am Madame Héloïse de Villefort.”

“How grateful will M. de Villefort be for all your goodness; how
thankfully will he acknowledge that to you alone he owes the existence
of his wife and child! Most certainly, but for the prompt assistance of
your intrepid servant, this dear child and myself must both have
perished.”

“Nay,” interposed Madame de Villefort, on whom the authoritative style
adopted by the count made a deep impression, “nay, but consider that to
preserve my life he has risked his own.”

Madame de Villefort made no further reply; her mind was utterly absorbed
in the contemplation of the person who, from the first instant she saw
him, had made so powerful an impression on her.

During the evident preoccupation of Madame de Villefort, Monte Cristo
scrutinized the features and appearance of the boy she kept folded in
her arms, lavishing on him the most tender endearments. The child was
small for his age, and unnaturally pale. A mass of straight black hair,
defying all attempts to train or curl it, fell over his projecting
forehead, and hung down to his shoulders, giving increased vivacity to
eyes already sparkling with a youthful love of mischief and fondness for
every forbidden enjoyment. His mouth was large, and the lips, which had
not yet regained their color, were particularly thin; in fact, the deep
and crafty look, giving a predominant expression to the child’s face,
belonged rather to a boy of twelve or fourteen than to one so young. His
first movement was to free himself by a violent push from the encircling
arms of his mother, and to rush forward to the casket from whence the
count had taken the phial of elixir; then, without asking permission of
anyone, he proceeded, in all the wilfulness of a spoiled child
unaccustomed to restrain either whims or caprices, to pull the corks out
of all the bottles.

Madame de Villefort became very pale, and, seizing her son’s arm, drew
him anxiously toward her; but, once satisfied of his safety, she also
cast a brief but expressive glance on the casket, which was not lost
upon the count. At this moment Ali entered. At sight of him Madame de
Villefort uttered an expression of pleasure, and, holding the child
still closer towards her, she said:

The count smiled as if the child bade fair to realize his hopes, while
Madame de Villefort reprimanded her son with a gentleness and moderation
very far from conveying the least idea of a fault having been committed.

“Will you permit me to inquire,” said Madame de Villefort, as she arose
to take her leave, “whether you usually reside here?”

“I dare not return with those dreadful horses,” said Madame de
Villefort.

Ali had, indeed, given proof of this; for, approaching the animals, who
had been got upon their legs with considerable difficulty, he rubbed
their foreheads and nostrils with a sponge soaked in aromatic vinegar,
and wiped off the sweat and foam that covered their mouths. Then,
commencing a loud whistling noise, he rubbed them well all over their
bodies for several minutes; then, undisturbed by the noisy crowd
collected round the broken carriage, Ali quietly harnessed the pacified
animals to the count’s chariot, took the reins in his hands, and mounted
the box, when to the utter astonishment of those who had witnessed the
ungovernable spirit and maddened speed of the same horses, he was
actually compelled to apply his whip in no very gentle manner before he
could induce them to start; and even then all that could be obtained
from the celebrated “dappled grays,” now changed into a couple of dull,
sluggish, stupid brutes, was a slow, pottering pace, kept up with so
much difficulty that Madame de Villefort was more than two hours
returning to her residence in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.

Héloïse de Villefort.

P.S.—Do pray contrive some means for me to meet the Count of Monte
Cristo at your house. I must and will see him again. I have just made M.
de Villefort promise to call on him, and I hope the visit will be
returned.

Vast was the crowd of visitors and inquiring friends who left their
names at the residence of Madame de Villefort, with the design of
renewing their visit at the right moment, of hearing from her lips all
the interesting circumstances of this most romantic adventure.

As for M. de Villefort, he fulfilled the predictions of Héloïse to the
letter,—donned his dress suit, drew on a pair of white gloves, ordered
the servants to attend the carriage dressed in their full livery, and
drove that same night to No. 30 in the Avenue des Champs-Élysées.

If the Count of Monte Cristo had been for a long time familiar with the
ways of Parisian society, he would have appreciated better the
significance of the step which M. de Villefort had taken. Standing well
at court, whether the king regnant was of the older or younger branch,
whether the government was doctrinaire liberal, or conservative; looked
upon by all as a man of talent, since those who have never experienced a
political check are generally so regarded; hated by many, but warmly
supported by others, without being really liked by anybody, M. de
Villefort held a high position in the magistracy, and maintained his
eminence like a Harlay or a Molé. His drawing-room, under the
regenerating influence of a young wife and a daughter by his first
marriage, scarcely eighteen, was still one of the well-regulated Paris
salons where the worship of traditional customs and the observance of
rigid etiquette were carefully maintained. A freezing politeness, a
strict fidelity to government principles, a profound contempt for
theories and theorists, a deep-seated hatred of ideality,—these were the
elements of private and public life displayed by M. de Villefort.

M. de Villefort was not only a magistrate, he was almost a diplomatist.
His relations with the former court, of which he always spoke with
dignity and respect, made him respected by the new one, and he knew so
many things, that not only was he always carefully considered, but
sometimes consulted. Perhaps this would not have been so had it been
possible to get rid of M. de Villefort; but, like the feudal barons who
rebelled against their sovereign, he dwelt in an impregnable fortress.
This fortress was his post as king’s attorney, all the advantages of
which he exploited with marvellous skill, and which he would not have
resigned but to be made deputy, and thus to replace neutrality by
opposition.

Ordinarily M. de Villefort made and returned very few visits. His wife
visited for him, and this was the received thing in the world, where the
weighty and multifarious occupations of the magistrate were accepted as
an excuse for what was really only calculated pride, a manifestation of
professed superiority—in fact, the application of the axiom, Pretend to
think well of yourself, and the world will think well of you, an axiom a
hundred times more useful in society nowadays than that of the Greeks,
“Know thyself,” a knowledge for which, in our days, we have substituted
the less difficult and more advantageous science of knowing others.

To his friends M. de Villefort was a powerful protector; to his enemies,
he was a silent, but bitter opponent; for those who were neither the one
nor the other, he was a statue of the law-made man. He had a haughty
bearing, a look either steady and impenetrable or insolently piercing
and inquisitorial. Four successive revolutions had built and cemented
the pedestal upon which his fortune was based.

M. de Villefort had the reputation of being the least curious and the
least wearisome man in France. He gave a ball every year, at which he
appeared for a quarter of an hour only,—that is to say, five-and-forty
minutes less than the king is visible at his balls. He was never seen at
the theatres, at concerts, or in any place of public resort.
Occasionally, but seldom, he played at whist, and then care was taken to
select partners worthy of him—sometimes they were ambassadors, sometimes
archbishops, or sometimes a prince, or a president, or some dowager
duchess.

Such was the man whose carriage had just now stopped before the Count of
Monte Cristo’s door. The valet de chambre announced M. de Villefort at
the moment when the count, leaning over a large table, was tracing on a
map the route from St. Petersburg to China.

“Sir,” said Villefort, in the squeaky tone assumed by magistrates in
their oratorical periods, and of which they cannot, or will not, divest
themselves in society, “sir, the signal service which you yesterday
rendered to my wife and son has made it a duty for me to offer you my
thanks. I have come, therefore, to discharge this duty, and to express
to you my overwhelming gratitude.”

“Monsieur,” replied the count, with a chilling air, “I am very happy to
have been the means of preserving a son to his mother, for they say that
the sentiment of maternity is the most holy of all; and the good fortune
which occurred to me, monsieur, might have enabled you to dispense with
a duty which, in its discharge, confers an undoubtedly great honor; for
I am aware that M. de Villefort is not usually lavish of the favor which
he now bestows on me,—a favor which, however estimable, is unequal to
the satisfaction which I have in my own consciousness.”

Villefort, astonished at this reply, which he by no means expected,
started like a soldier who feels the blow levelled at him over the armor
he wears, and a curl of his disdainful lip indicated that from that
moment he noted in the tablets of his brain that the Count of Monte
Cristo was by no means a highly bred gentleman.

Monte Cristo pointed to a chair, which the procureur was obliged to take
the trouble to move forwards himself, while the count merely fell back
into his own, on which he had been kneeling when M. Villefort entered.
Thus the count was halfway turned towards his visitor, having his back
towards the window, his elbow resting on the geographical chart which
furnished the theme of conversation for the moment,—a conversation which
assumed, as in the case of the interviews with Danglars and Morcerf, a
turn analogous to the persons, if not to the situation.

“Ah, you philosophize,” replied Villefort, after a moment’s silence,
during which, like a wrestler who encounters a powerful opponent, he
took breath; “well, sir, really, if, like you, I had nothing else to do,
I should seek a more amusing occupation.”

Villefort’s astonishment redoubled at this second thrust so forcibly
made by his strange adversary. It was a long time since the magistrate
had heard a paradox so strong, or rather, to say the truth more exactly,
it was the first time he had ever heard of it. The procureur exerted
himself to reply.

“But with what motive have you learned all this?” inquired Villefort, in
astonishment.

“Pray, sir, explain yourself,” said Villefort, more and more astonished,
“I really do—not—understand you—perfectly.”

“Then,” said Villefort, more and more amazed, and really supposing he
was speaking to a mystic or a madman, “you consider yourself as one of
those extraordinary beings whom you have mentioned?”

“Your pardon, sir,” replied Villefort, quite astounded, “but you will
excuse me if, when I presented myself to you, I was unaware that I
should meet with a person whose knowledge and understanding so far
surpass the usual knowledge and understanding of men. It is not usual
with us corrupted wretches of civilization to find gentlemen like
yourself, possessors, as you are, of immense fortune—at least, so it is
said—and I beg you to observe that I do not inquire, I merely repeat;—it
is not usual, I say, for such privileged and wealthy beings to waste
their time in speculations on the state of society, in philosophical
reveries, intended at best to console those whom fate has disinherited
from the goods of this world.”

“Sir,” said Villefort, “upon my word, you overcome me. I really never
heard a person speak as you do.”

“Ah,” said Villefort, smiling, “I confess I should like to be warned
when one of these beings is in contact with me.”

“That is to say,” replied Villefort with hesitation, “that human nature
being weak, every man, according to your creed, has committed faults.”

“And that you alone, amongst the men whom you do not recognize as your
brothers—for you have said so,” observed Villefort in a tone that
faltered somewhat—“you alone are perfect.”

“No, no,—by no means,” said Villefort, who was afraid of seeming to
abandon his ground. “No; by your brilliant and almost sublime
conversation you have elevated me above the ordinary level; we no longer
talk, we rise to dissertation. But you know how the theologians in their
collegiate chairs, and philosophers in their controversies, occasionally
say cruel truths; let us suppose for the moment that we are theologizing
in a social way, or even philosophically, and I will say to you, rude as
it may seem, ‘My brother, you sacrifice greatly to pride; you may be
above others, but above you there is God.’”

“Above us all, sir,” was Monte Cristo’s response, in a tone and with an
emphasis so deep that Villefort involuntarily shuddered. “I have my
pride for men—serpents always ready to threaten everyone who would pass
without crushing them under foot. But I lay aside that pride before God,
who has taken me from nothing to make me what I am.”

“Then, count, I admire you,” said Villefort, who, for the first time in
this strange conversation, used the aristocratic form to the unknown
personage, whom, until now, he had only called monsieur. “Yes, and I say
to you, if you are really strong, really superior, really pious, or
impenetrable, which you were right in saying amounts to the same
thing—then be proud, sir, for that is the characteristic of
predominance. Yet you have unquestionably some ambition.”

Villefort looked at Monte Cristo with extreme amazement.

“Sir,” continued Villefort, “there is something to fear besides death,
old age, and madness. For instance, there is apoplexy—that lightning-
stroke which strikes but does not destroy you, and yet which brings
everything to an end. You are still yourself as now, and yet you are
yourself no longer; you who, like Ariel, verge on the angelic, are but
an inert mass, which, like Caliban, verges on the brutal; and this is
called in human tongues, as I tell you, neither more nor less than
apoplexy. Come, if so you will, count, and continue this conversation at
my house, any day you may be willing to see an adversary capable of
understanding and anxious to refute you, and I will show you my father,
M. Noirtier de Villefort, one of the most fiery Jacobins of the French
Revolution; that is to say, he had the most remarkable audacity,
seconded by a most powerful organization—a man who has not, perhaps,
like yourself seen all the kingdoms of the earth, but who has helped to
overturn one of the greatest; in fact, a man who believed himself, like
you, one of the envoys, not of God, but of a supreme being; not of
Providence, but of fate. Well, sir, the rupture of a blood-vessel on the
lobe of the brain has destroyed all this, not in a day, not in an hour,
but in a second. M. Noirtier, who, on the previous night, was the old
Jacobin, the old senator, the old Carbonaro, laughing at the guillotine,
the cannon, and the dagger—M. Noirtier, playing with revolutions—M.
Noirtier, for whom France was a vast chess-board, from which pawns,
rooks, knights, and queens were to disappear, so that the king was
checkmated—M. Noirtier, the redoubtable, was the next morning poor M.
Noirtier, the helpless old man, at the tender mercies of the weakest
creature in the household, that is, his grandchild, Valentine; a dumb
and frozen carcass, in fact, living painlessly on, that time may be
given for his frame to decompose without his consciousness of its
decay.”

“My deduction is,” replied Villefort, “that my father, led away by his
passions, has committed some fault unknown to human justice, but marked
by the justice of God. That God, desirous in his mercy to punish but one
person, has visited this justice on him alone.”

Monte Cristo with a smile on his lips, uttered in the depths of his soul
a groan which would have made Villefort fly had he but heard it.

“Adieu, sir,” said the magistrate, who had risen from his seat; “I leave
you, bearing a remembrance of you—a remembrance of esteem, which I hope
will not be disagreeable to you when you know me better; for I am not a
man to bore my friends, as you will learn. Besides, you have made an
eternal friend of Madame de Villefort.”

The count bowed, and contented himself with seeing Villefort to the door
of his cabinet, the procureur being escorted to his carriage by two
footmen, who, on a signal from their master, followed him with every
mark of attention. When he had gone, Monte Cristo breathed a profound
sigh, and said:

The very anticipations of delight to be enjoyed in his forthcoming
visits—the bright, pure gleam of heavenly happiness it diffused over the
almost deadly warfare in which he had voluntarily engaged, illumined his
whole countenance with a look of ineffable joy and calmness, as,
immediately after Villefort’s departure, his thoughts flew back to the
cheering prospect before him, of tasting, at least, a brief respite from
the fierce and stormy passions of his mind. Even Ali, who had hastened
to obey the Count’s summons, went forth from his master’s presence in
charmed amazement at the unusual animation and pleasure depicted on
features ordinarily so stern and cold; while, as though dreading to put
to flight the agreeable ideas hovering over his patron’s meditations,
whatever they were, the faithful Nubian walked on tiptoe towards the
door, holding his breath, lest its faintest sound should dissipate his
master’s happy reverie.

“How can you for an instant entertain so unworthy a thought, dear
Valentine? Have I not, from the first blessed hour of our acquaintance,
schooled all my words and actions to your sentiments and ideas? And you
have, I am sure, the fullest confidence in my honor. When you spoke to
me of experiencing a vague and indefinite sense of coming danger, I
placed myself blindly and devotedly at your service, asking no other
reward than the pleasure of being useful to you; and have I ever since,
by word or look, given you cause of regret for having selected me from
the numbers that would willingly have sacrificed their lives for you?
You told me, my dear Valentine, that you were engaged to M. d’Épinay,
and that your father was resolved upon completing the match, and that
from his will there was no appeal, as M. de Villefort was never known to
change a determination once formed. I kept in the background, as you
wished, and waited, not for the decision of your heart or my own, but
hoping that Providence would graciously interpose in our behalf, and
order events in our favor. But what cared I for delays or difficulties,
Valentine, as long as you confessed that you loved me, and took pity on
me? If you will only repeat that avowal now and then, I can endure
anything.”

“No, Maximilian, I am not offended,” answered she, “but do you not see
what a poor, helpless being I am, almost a stranger and an outcast in my
father’s house, where even he is seldom seen; whose will has been
thwarted, and spirits broken, from the age of ten years, beneath the
iron rod so sternly held over me; oppressed, mortified, and persecuted,
day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute, no person has cared for,
even observed my sufferings, nor have I ever breathed one word on the
subject save to yourself. Outwardly and in the eyes of the world, I am
surrounded by kindness and affection; but the reverse is the case. The
general remark is, ‘Oh, it cannot be expected that one of so stern a
character as M. Villefort could lavish the tenderness some fathers do on
their daughters. What though she has lost her own mother at a tender
age, she has had the happiness to find a second mother in Madame de
Villefort.’ The world, however, is mistaken; my father abandons me from
utter indifference, while my mother-in-law detests me with a hatred so
much the more terrible because it is veiled beneath a continual smile.”

“I do not know; but, though unwilling to introduce money matters into
our present conversation, I will just say this much—that her extreme
dislike to me has its origin there; and I much fear she envies me the
fortune I enjoy in right of my mother, and which will be more than
doubled at the death of M. and Mme. de Saint-Méran, whose sole heiress I
am. Madame de Villefort has nothing of her own, and hates me for being
so richly endowed. Alas, how gladly would I exchange the half of this
wealth for the happiness of at least sharing my father’s love. God
knows, I would prefer sacrificing the whole, so that it would obtain me
a happy and affectionate home.”

“Now, then,” said Maximilian, leaning on the handle of his spade, “I
would give a good deal to know how it comes about that the Count of
Monte Cristo is acquainted with M. de Villefort.”

It was really the Count of Monte Cristo who had just arrived at Madame
de Villefort’s for the purpose of returning the procureur’s visit, and
at his name, as may be easily imagined, the whole house was in
confusion.

Madame de Villefort, who was alone in her drawing-room when the count
was announced, desired that her son might be brought thither instantly
to renew his thanks to the count; and Edward, who heard this great
personage talked of for two whole days, made all possible haste to come
to him, not from obedience to his mother, or out of any feeling of
gratitude to the count, but from sheer curiosity, and that some chance
remark might give him the opportunity for making one of the impertinent
speeches which made his mother say:

After the usual civilities, the count inquired after M. de Villefort.

“What is your sister Valentine doing?” inquired Madame de Villefort of
Edward; “tell someone to bid her come here, that I may have the honor of
introducing her to the count.”

“The daughter of M. de Villefort by his first marriage,” replied the
young wife, “a fine well-grown girl.”

Madame de Villefort merely cried, “Be still, Edward!” She then added,
“This young madcap is, however, very nearly right, and merely re-echoes
what he has heard me say with pain a hundred times; for Mademoiselle de
Villefort is, in spite of all we can do to rouse her, of a melancholy
disposition and taciturn habit, which frequently injure the effect of
her beauty. But what detains her? Go, Edward, and see.”

Madame de Villefort stretched out her hand to ring, intending to direct
her waiting-maid to the spot where she would find Valentine, when the
young lady herself entered the apartment. She appeared much dejected;
and any person who considered her attentively might have observed the
traces of recent tears in her eyes.

“Mademoiselle de Villefort, my step-daughter,” said Madame de Villefort
to Monte Cristo, leaning back on her sofa and motioning towards
Valentine with her hand.

Madame de Villefort at this really did turn pale, and was very nearly
angry with this household plague, who answered to the name of Edward;
but the count, on the contrary, smiled, and appeared to look at the boy
complacently, which caused the maternal heart to bound again with joy
and enthusiasm.

“But, madame,” replied the count, continuing the conversation, and
looking by turns at Madame de Villefort and Valentine, “have I not
already had the honor of meeting yourself and mademoiselle before? I
could not help thinking so just now; the idea came over my mind, and as
mademoiselle entered the sight of her was an additional ray of light
thrown on a confused remembrance; excuse the remark.”

“I do not think it likely, sir; Mademoiselle de Villefort is not very
fond of society, and we very seldom go out,” said the young lady.

“No, indeed,” replied Madame de Villefort; “and yet it appears to me,
sir, that if I had met you anywhere, the recollection of you must have
been imprinted on my memory.”

“Ah, yes—true, mademoiselle,” exclaimed Monte Cristo as if this simple
explanation was sufficient to revive the recollection he sought. “It was
at Perugia on Corpus Christi Day, in the garden of the Hôtel des Postes,
when chance brought us together; you, Madame de Villefort, and her son;
I now remember having had the honor of meeting you.”

“I perfectly well remember Perugia, sir, and the Hôtel des Postes, and
the festival of which you speak,” said Madame de Villefort, “but in vain
do I tax my memory, of whose treachery I am ashamed, for I really do not
recall to mind that I ever had the pleasure of seeing you before.”

“You, madame, remained under the arbor; do you not remember, that while
you were seated on a stone bench, and while, as I told you, Mademoiselle
de Villefort and your young son were absent, you conversed for a
considerable time with somebody?”

“Yes, true,” replied Madame de Villefort, somewhat uneasily, “I remember
now.”

“I do not recollect now all the various subjects of which we discoursed,
madame,” continued the count with perfect calmness; “but I perfectly
remember that, falling into the error which others had entertained
respecting me, you consulted me as to the health of Mademoiselle de
Villefort.”

“Yes, really, sir, you were in fact a medical man,” said Madame de
Villefort, “since you had cured the sick.”

“It is six o’clock,” said Madame de Villefort, evidently agitated.
“Valentine, will you not go and see if your grandpapa will have his
dinner?”

“Oh, madame,” said the count, when Valentine had left the room, “was it
on my account that you sent Mademoiselle de Villefort away?”

“Yes, madame, M. de Villefort spoke of it to me—a paralysis, I think.”

“Edward, you naughty boy,” exclaimed Madame de Villefort, snatching the
mutilated book from the urchin’s grasp, “you are positively past
bearing; you really disturb the conversation; go, leave us, and join
your sister Valentine in dear grandpapa Noirtier’s room.”

“Take it, then, and pray disturb us no longer,” said Madame de
Villefort, giving the album to Edward, who then went towards the door,
led by his mother. The count followed her with his eyes.

Madame de Villefort closed the door carefully after the child, the count
appearing not to notice her; then casting a scrutinizing glance around
the chamber, the young wife returned to her chair, in which she seated
herself.

“Oh, sometimes severity is quite necessary,” replied Madame de
Villefort, with all a mother’s real firmness.

“Brucine is extracted from the false angostura8 is it not?” inquired
Madame de Villefort.

“Oh, I am aware of that,” said Madame de Villefort; “but I have a
passion for the occult sciences, which speak to the imagination like
poetry, and are reducible to figures, like an algebraic equation; but go
on, I beg of you; what you say interests me to the greatest degree.”

“I have often read, and read again, the history of Mithridates,” said
Madame de Villefort in a tone of reflection, “and had always considered
it a fable.”

“Really,” said Madame de Villefort, whose eyes sparkled with strange
fire at this conversation.

“Then,” remarked Madame de Villefort, “they have again discovered the
secret of the famous aqua Tofana that they said was lost at Perugia.”

“So,” added Madame de Villefort, constantly returning to her object,
“the poisons of the Borgias, the Medicis, the Renées, the Ruggieris, and
later, probably, that of Baron de Trenck, whose story has been so
misused by modern drama and romance——”

“But,” remarked Madame de Villefort, “all these circumstances which you
link thus to one another may be broken by the least accident; the
vulture may not see the fowl, or may fall a hundred yards from the fish-
pond.”

Madame de Villefort was in deep thought, yet listened attentively.

Madame de Villefort appeared more and more thoughtful.

“And then,” said Madame de Villefort, endeavoring by a struggle, and
with effort, to get away from her thoughts, “however skilfully it is
prepared, crime is always crime, and if it avoid human scrutiny, it does
not escape the eye of God. The Orientals are stronger than we are in
cases of conscience, and, very prudently, have no hell—that is the
point.”

“Yet conscience remains,” remarked Madame de Villefort in an agitated
voice, and with a stifled sigh.

Madame de Villefort listened with avidity to these appalling maxims and
horrible paradoxes, delivered by the count with that ironical simplicity
which was peculiar to him.

“Oh,” observed Madame de Villefort, “it must be an admirable anti-
spasmodic.”

“Most assuredly,” responded Madame de Villefort in the same tone. “As
for me, so nervous, and so subject to fainting fits, I should require a
Doctor Adelmonte to invent for me some means of breathing freely and
tranquillizing my mind, in the fear I have of dying some fine day of
suffocation. In the meanwhile, as the thing is difficult to find in
France, and your abbé is not probably disposed to make a journey to
Paris on my account, I must continue to use Monsieur Planche’s anti-
spasmodics; and mint and Hoffman’s drops are among my favorite remedies.
Here are some lozenges which I have made up on purpose; they are
compounded doubly strong.”

The clock struck half-past six, and a lady was announced, a friend of
Madame de Villefort, who came to dine with her.

“If I had had the honor of seeing you for the third or fourth time,
count, instead of only for the second,” said Madame de Villefort; “if I
had had the honor of being your friend, instead of only having the
happiness of being under an obligation to you, I should insist on
detaining you to dinner, and not allow myself to be daunted by a first
refusal.”

Monte Cristo bowed, and left the house. Madame de Villefort remained
immersed in thought.

“My good fellow,” said Château-Renaud, “the count is your friend and you
treat him accordingly. Do not believe what Albert is telling you,
countess; so far from the sensation excited in the Parisian circles by
the appearance of the Count of Monte Cristo having abated, I take upon
myself to declare that it is as strong as ever. His first astounding act
upon coming amongst us was to present a pair of horses, worth 32,000
francs, to Madame Danglars; his second, the almost miraculous
preservation of Madame de Villefort’s life; now it seems that he has
carried off the prize awarded by the Jockey Club. I therefore maintain,
in spite of Morcerf, that not only is the count the object of interest
at this present moment, but also that he will continue to be so for a
month longer if he pleases to exhibit an eccentricity of conduct which,
after all, may be his ordinary mode of existence.”

“But it is not so easy to forget, monsieur, that the very next day after
your princely gift you saved the life of my dear friend, Madame de
Villefort, which was endangered by the very animals your generosity
restored to me.”

“This time, at least, I do not deserve your thanks. It was Ali, my
Nubian slave, who rendered this service to Madame de Villefort.”

“Then,” said the count, “I am emboldened to speak openly to you. M.
Danglars is my banker; M. de Villefort has overwhelmed me with
politeness in return for a service which a casual piece of good fortune
enabled me to render him. I predict from all this an avalanche of
dinners and routs. Now, in order not to presume on this, and also to be
beforehand with them, I have, if agreeable to you, thought of inviting
M. and Madame Danglars, and M. and Madame de Villefort, to my country-
house at Auteuil. If I were to invite you and the Count and Countess of
Morcerf to this dinner, I should give it the appearance of being a
matrimonial meeting, or at least Madame de Morcerf would look upon the
affair in that light, especially if Baron Danglars did me the honor to
bring his daughter. In that case your mother would hold me in aversion,
and I do not at all wish that; on the contrary, I desire to stand high
in her esteem.”

“Yes, he is to marry Mademoiselle de Villefort.”

Our readers must now allow us to transport them again to the enclosure
surrounding M. de Villefort’s house, and, behind the gate, half screened
from view by the large chestnut-trees, which on all sides spread their
luxuriant branches, we shall find some people of our acquaintance. This
time Maximilian was the first to arrive. He was intently watching for a
shadow to appear among the trees, and awaiting with anxiety the sound of
a light step on the gravel walk.

“I do not know particulars. I can only tell you that Madame de Villefort
sent to request my presence, as she had a communication to make on which
a part of my fortune depended. Let them take my fortune, I am already
too rich; and, perhaps, when they have taken it, they will leave me in
peace and quietness. You would love me as much if I were poor, would you
not, Maximilian?”

“Ah heavens, if it were that! But no, the communication would not come
through Madame de Villefort.”

“Because—I scarcely know why—but it has appeared as if Madame de
Villefort secretly objected to the marriage, although she did not choose
openly to oppose it.”

“Is it so? Then I feel as if I could adore Madame de Villefort.”

“No, Maximilian, it is not suitors to which Madame de Villefort objects,
it is marriage itself.”

“You do not understand me, Maximilian. About a year ago, I talked of
retiring to a convent. Madame de Villefort, in spite of all the remarks
which she considered it her duty to make, secretly approved of the
proposition, my father consented to it at her instigation, and it was
only on account of my poor grandfather that I finally abandoned the
project. You can form no idea of the expression of that old man’s eye
when he looks at me, the only person in the world whom he loves, and, I
had almost said, by whom he is beloved in return. When he learned my
resolution, I shall never forget the reproachful look which he cast on
me, and the tears of utter despair which chased each other down his
lifeless cheeks. Ah, Maximilian, I experienced, at that moment, such
remorse for my intention, that, throwing myself at his feet, I
exclaimed,—‘Forgive me, pray forgive me, my dear grandfather; they may
do what they will with me, I will never leave you.’ When I had ceased
speaking, he thankfully raised his eyes to heaven, but without uttering
a word. Ah, Maximilian, I may have much to suffer, but I feel as if my
grandfather’s look at that moment would more than compensate for all.”

“Dear Valentine, you are a perfect angel, and I am sure I do not know
what I—sabring right and left among the Bedouins—can have done to merit
your being revealed to me, unless, indeed, Heaven took into
consideration the fact that the victims of my sword were infidels. But
tell me what interest Madame de Villefort can have in your remaining
unmarried?”

“Ah,” cried Valentine, “he is too much the friend of Madame de Villefort
ever to be mine.”

“The friend of Madame de Villefort! It cannot be; surely, Valentine, you
are mistaken?”

“If it were otherwise—if he treated me diplomatically—that is to say,
like a man who wishes, by some means or other, to obtain a footing in
the house, so that he may ultimately gain the power of dictating to its
occupants—he would, if it had been but once, have honored me with the
smile which you extol so loudly; but no, he saw that I was unhappy, he
understood that I could be of no use to him, and therefore paid no
attention to me whatever. Who knows but that, in order to please Madame
de Villefort and my father, he may not persecute me by every means in
his power? It is not just that he should despise me so, without any
reason. Ah, forgive me,” said Valentine, perceiving the effect which her
words were producing on Maximilian: “I have done wrong, for I have given
utterance to thoughts concerning that man which I did not even know
existed in my heart. I do not deny the influence of which you speak, or
that I have not myself experienced it, but with me it has been
productive of evil rather than good.”

“I own that your question embarrasses me, Valentine, for I cannot say
that the count has rendered me any ostensible service. Still, as I have
already told you, I have an instinctive affection for him, the source of
which I cannot explain to you. Has the sun done anything for me? No; he
warms me with his rays, and it is by his light that I see you—nothing
more. Has such and such a perfume done anything for me? No; its odor
charms one of my senses—that is all I can say when I am asked why I
praise it. My friendship for him is as strange and unaccountable as his
for me. A secret voice seems to whisper to me that there must be
something more than chance in this unexpected reciprocity of friendship.
In his most simple actions, as well as in his most secret thoughts, I
find a relation to my own. You will perhaps smile at me when I tell you
that, ever since I have known this man, I have involuntarily entertained
the idea that all the good fortune which has befallen me originated from
him. However, I have managed to live thirty years without this
protection, you will say; but I will endeavor a little to illustrate my
meaning. He invited me to dine with him on Saturday, which was a very
natural thing for him to do. Well, what have I learned since? That your
mother and M. de Villefort are both coming to this dinner. I shall meet
them there, and who knows what future advantages may result from the
interview? This may appear to you to be no unusual combination of
circumstances; nevertheless, I perceive some hidden plot in the
arrangement—something, in fact, more than is apparent on a casual view
of the subject. I believe that this singular man, who appears to fathom
the motives of everyone, has purposely arranged for me to meet M. and
Madame de Villefort, and sometimes, I confess, I have gone so far as to
try to read in his eyes whether he was in possession of the secret of
our love.”

“My good friend,” said Valentine, “I should take you for a visionary,
and should tremble for your reason, if I were always to hear you talk in
a strain similar to this. Is it possible that you can see anything more
than the merest chance in this meeting? Pray reflect a little. My
father, who never goes out, has several times been on the point of
refusing this invitation; Madame de Villefort, on the contrary, is
burning with the desire of seeing this extraordinary nabob in his own
house, therefore, she has with great difficulty prevailed on my father
to accompany her. No, no; it is as I have said, Maximilian,—there is no
one in the world of whom I can ask help but yourself and my grandfather,
who is little better than a corpse—no support to cling to but my mother
in heaven!”

Chapter 58. M. Noirtier de Villefort

M. de Villefort entered his father’s room, followed by Madame de
Villefort. Both of the visitors, after saluting the old man and speaking
to Barrois, a faithful servant, who had been twenty-five years in his
service, took their places on either side of the paralytic.

Noirtier’s hair was long and white, and flowed over his shoulders; while
in his eyes, shaded by thick black lashes, was concentrated, as it often
happens with an organ which is used to the exclusion of the others, all
the activity, address, force, and intelligence which were formerly
diffused over his whole body; and so although the movement of the arm,
the sound of the voice, and the agility of the body, were wanting, the
speaking eye sufficed for all. He commanded with it; it was the medium
through which his thanks were conveyed. In short, his whole appearance
produced on the mind the impression of a corpse with living eyes, and
nothing could be more startling than to observe the expression of anger
or joy suddenly lighting up these organs, while the rest of the rigid
and marble-like features were utterly deprived of the power of
participation. Three persons only could understand this language of the
poor paralytic; these were Villefort, Valentine, and the old servant of
whom we have already spoken. But as Villefort saw his father but seldom,
and then only when absolutely obliged, and as he never took any pains to
please or gratify him when he was there, all the old man’s happiness was
centred in his granddaughter. Valentine, by means of her love, her
patience, and her devotion, had learned to read in Noirtier’s look all
the varied feelings which were passing in his mind. To this dumb
language, which was so unintelligible to others, she answered by
throwing her whole soul into the expression of her countenance, and in
this manner were the conversations sustained between the blooming girl
and the helpless invalid, whose body could scarcely be called a living
one, but who, nevertheless, possessed a fund of knowledge and
penetration, united with a will as powerful as ever although clogged by
a body rendered utterly incapable of obeying its impulses.

Villefort did not need the help of either Valentine or the domestic in
order to carry on with his father the strange conversation which he was
about to begin. As we have said, he perfectly understood the old man’s
vocabulary, and if he did not use it more often, it was only
indifference and ennui which prevented him from so doing. He therefore
allowed Valentine to go into the garden, sent away Barrois, and after
having seated himself at his father’s right hand, while Madame de
Villefort placed herself on the left, he addressed him thus:

“I trust you will not be displeased, sir, that Valentine has not come
with us, or that I dismissed Barrois, for our conference will be one
which could not with propriety be carried on in the presence of either.
Madame de Villefort and I have a communication to make to you.”

Noirtier’s face remained perfectly passive during this long preamble,
while, on the contrary, Villefort’s eye was endeavoring to penetrate
into the inmost recesses of the old man’s heart.

“Sir,” resumed Villefort, “we are thinking of marrying Valentine.” Had
the old man’s face been moulded in wax it could not have shown less
emotion at this news than was now to be traced there. “The marriage will
take place in less than three months,” said Villefort.

Madame de Villefort now took her part in the conversation and added:

While his wife was speaking, Villefort had narrowly watched the old
man’s countenance. When Madame de Villefort pronounced the name of
Franz, the pupil of M. Noirtier’s eye began to dilate, and his eyelids
trembled with the same movement that may be perceived on the lips of an
individual about to speak, and he darted a lightning glance at Madame de
Villefort and his son. The procureur, who knew the political hatred
which had formerly existed between M. Noirtier and the elder d’Épinay,
well understood the agitation and anger which the announcement had
produced; but, feigning not to perceive either, he immediately resumed
the narrative begun by his wife.

Noirtier’s look was furious; it was very evident that something
desperate was passing in the old man’s mind, for a cry of anger and
grief rose in his throat, and not being able to find vent in utterance,
appeared almost to choke him, for his face and lips turned quite purple
with the struggle. Villefort quietly opened a window, saying, “It is
very warm, and the heat affects M. Noirtier.” He then returned to his
place, but did not sit down.

“This marriage,” added Madame de Villefort, “is quite agreeable to the
wishes of M. d’Épinay and his family; besides, he had no relations
nearer than an uncle and aunt, his mother having died at his birth, and
his father having been assassinated in 1815, that is to say, when he was
but two years old; it naturally followed that the child was permitted to
choose his own pursuits, and he has, therefore, seldom acknowledged any
other authority but that of his own will.”

“That assassination was a mysterious affair,” said Villefort, “and the
perpetrators have hitherto escaped detection, although suspicion has
fallen on the head of more than one person.”

“Now,” continued Villefort, “those to whom the guilt really belongs, by
whom the crime was committed, on whose heads the justice of man may
probably descend here, and the certain judgment of God hereafter, would
rejoice in the opportunity thus afforded of bestowing such a peace-
offering as Valentine on the son of him whose life they so ruthlessly
destroyed.” Noirtier had succeeded in mastering his emotion more than
could have been deemed possible with such an enfeebled and shattered
frame.

“Yes, I understand,” was the reply contained in his look; and this look
expressed a feeling of strong indignation, mixed with profound contempt.
Villefort fully understood his father’s meaning, and answered by a
slight shrug of his shoulders. He then motioned to his wife to take
leave.

“Now sir,” said Madame de Villefort, “I must bid you farewell. Would you
like me to send Edward to you for a short time?”

It had been agreed that the old man should express his approbation by
closing his eyes, his refusal by winking them several times, and if he
had some desire or feeling to express, he raised them to heaven. If he
wanted Valentine, he closed his right eye only, and if Barrois, the
left. At Madame de Villefort’s proposition he instantly winked his eyes.

M. and Madame de Villefort bowed and left the room, giving orders that
Valentine should be summoned to her grandfather’s presence, and feeling
sure that she would have much to do to restore calmness to the perturbed
spirit of the invalid. Valentine, with a color still heightened by
emotion, entered the room just after her parents had quitted it. One
look was sufficient to tell her that her grandfather was suffering, and
that there was much on his mind which he was wishing to communicate to
her.

“Madame de Villefort?”

“Let me think a moment. I do assure you, grandpapa—Ah—M. and Madame de
Villefort have just left this room, have they not?”

“Yes.” Valentine rang the bell, and ordered the servant to tell Monsieur
or Madame de Villefort that they were requested to come to M. Noirtier’s
room.

“I am sure you are; it is not very difficult to discover that.” And the
young girl smiled on her grandfather, as if he had been a child. M. de
Villefort entered, followed by Barrois.

“Sir,” said Valentine, “my grandfather wishes for a notary.” At this
strange and unexpected demand M. de Villefort and his father exchanged
looks.

“Do you wish for a notary?” asked Villefort.

“What do you want with a notary?” again repeated Villefort. The
invalid’s eye remained fixed, by which expression he intended to
intimate that his resolution was unalterable.

“Is it to do us some ill turn? Do you think it is worth while?” said
Villefort.

“You shall have a notary, as you absolutely wish for one, sir,” said
Villefort; “but I shall explain to him your state of health, and make
excuses for you, for the scene cannot fail of being a most ridiculous
one.”

As soon as Barrois had left the room, Noirtier looked at Valentine with
a malicious expression that said many things. The young girl perfectly
understood the look, and so did Villefort, for his countenance became
clouded, and he knitted his eyebrows angrily. He took a seat, and
quietly awaited the arrival of the notary. Noirtier saw him seat himself
with an appearance of perfect indifference, at the same time giving a
side look at Valentine, which made her understand that she also was to
remain in the room. Three-quarters of an hour after, Barrois returned,
bringing the notary with him.

“Sir,” said Villefort, after the first salutations were over, “you were
sent for by M. Noirtier, whom you see here. All his limbs have become
completely paralysed, he has lost his voice also, and we ourselves find
much trouble in endeavoring to catch some fragments of his meaning.”

“Permit me,” said the notary, turning first to Villefort and then to
Valentine—“permit me to state that the case in question is just one of
those in which a public officer like myself cannot proceed to act
without thereby incurring a dangerous responsibility. The first thing
necessary to render an act valid is, that the notary should be
thoroughly convinced that he has faithfully interpreted the will and
wishes of the person dictating the act. Now I cannot be sure of the
approbation or disapprobation of a client who cannot speak, and as the
object of his desire or his repugnance cannot be clearly proved to me,
on account of his want of speech, my services here would be quite
useless, and cannot be legally exercised.”

But before the notary could answer, Villefort had drawn him aside.

“You must see that to be an utter impossibility,” said Villefort.
Valentine and the old man heard this conversation, and Noirtier fixed
his eye so earnestly on Valentine that she felt bound to answer to the
look.

“Really, sir, you must allow that this is most extraordinary,” said the
astonished notary, turning to M. de Villefort.

“What?” said Villefort, “do you mean to say that Valentine is not
interested in your will?”

“What is he going to do?” thought Villefort, whose position demanded
much reserve, but who was longing to know what his father’s intentions
were. He left the room to give orders for another notary to be sent, but
Barrois, who had heard all that passed, had guessed his master’s wishes,
and had already gone to fetch one. The procureur then told his wife to
come up. In the course of a quarter of an hour everyone had assembled in
the chamber of the paralytic; the second notary had also arrived.

“Oh!” said Madame de Villefort, “there is not much doubt on that
subject. M. Noirtier tenderly loves his granddaughter, Mademoiselle de
Villefort; it is she who has nursed and tended him for six years, and
has, by her devoted attention, fully secured the affection, I had almost
said the gratitude, of her grandfather, and it is but just that she
should reap the fruit of her devotion.”

The eye of Noirtier clearly showed by its expression that he was not
deceived by the false assent given by Madame de Villefort’s words and
manner to the motives which she supposed him to entertain.

“Is it, then, to Mademoiselle Valentine de Villefort that you leave
these 900,000 francs?” demanded the notary, thinking he had only to
insert this clause, but waiting first for the assent of Noirtier, which
it was necessary should be given before all the witnesses of this
singular scene.

“What,” said the notary, “do you not intend making Mademoiselle
Valentine de Villefort your residuary legatee?”

“Thank you, thank you,” murmured she. The old man’s declaration that
Valentine was not the destined inheritor of his fortune had excited the
hopes of Madame de Villefort; she gradually approached the invalid, and
said:

“Then, doubtless, dear M. Noirtier, you intend leaving your fortune to
your grandson, Edward de Villefort?”

“No?” said the notary; “then, perhaps, it is to your son, M. de
Villefort?”

“No.” The two notaries looked at each other in mute astonishment and
inquiry as to what were the real intentions of the testator. Villefort
and his wife both grew red, one from shame, the other from anger.

The old man’s eyes passed rapidly from Villefort and his wife, and
rested on Valentine with a look of unutterable fondness.

“Oh, gentlemen, you see it is all useless, and that my father’s mind is
really impaired,” said Villefort.

“Really, this is too absurd,” said Villefort.

There was a profound silence. The two notaries were holding a
consultation as to the best means of proceeding with the affair.
Valentine was looking at her grandfather with a smile of intense
gratitude, and Villefort was biting his lips with vexation, while Madame
de Villefort could not succeed in repressing an inward feeling of joy,
which, in spite of herself, appeared in her whole countenance.

“But,” said Villefort, who was the first to break the silence, “I
consider that I am the best judge of the propriety of the marriage in
question. I am the only person possessing the right to dispose of my
daughter’s hand. It is my wish that she should marry M. Franz
d’Épinay—and she shall marry him.”

“Sir,” said the notary, “how do you intend disposing of your fortune in
case Mademoiselle de Villefort still determines on marrying M. Franz?”
The old man gave no answer.

“My father knows me,” replied Villefort; “he is quite sure that his
wishes will be held sacred by me; besides, he understands that in my
position I cannot plead against the poor.” The eye of Noirtier beamed
with triumph.

“What do you decide on, sir?” asked the notary of Villefort.

Having said this, Villefort quitted the room with his wife, leaving his
father at liberty to do as he pleased. The same day the will was made,
the witnesses were brought, it was approved by the old man, sealed in
the presence of all and given in charge to M. Deschamps, the family
notary.

M. and Madame de Villefort found on their return that the Count of Monte
Cristo, who had come to visit them in their absence, had been ushered
into the drawing-room, and was still awaiting them there. Madame de
Villefort, who had not yet sufficiently recovered from her late emotion
to allow of her entertaining visitors so immediately, retired to her
bedroom, while the procureur, who could better depend upon himself,
proceeded at once to the salon.

Although M. de Villefort flattered himself that, to all outward view, he
had completely masked the feelings which were passing in his mind, he
did not know that the cloud was still lowering on his brow, so much so
that the count, whose smile was radiant, immediately noticed his sombre
and thoughtful air.

“Ma foi!” said Monte Cristo, after the first compliments were over,
“what is the matter with you, M. de Villefort? Have I arrived at the
moment when you were drawing up an indictment for a capital crime?”

Villefort tried to smile.

“Oh, no, monsieur,” said Villefort with a bitter smile; “it is only a
loss of money which I have sustained—nothing worth mentioning, I assure
you.”

“It is not so much the loss of the money that vexes me,” said Villefort,
“though, after all, 900,000 francs are worth regretting; but I am the
more annoyed with this fate, chance, or whatever you please to call the
power which has destroyed my hopes and my fortune, and may blast the
prospects of my child also, as it is all occasioned by an old man
relapsed into second childhood.”

“My dear,” said Madame de Villefort, who had just entered the room,
“perhaps you exaggerate the evil.”

Madame de Villefort acknowledged the salutation with one of her most
gracious smiles.

“What is this that M. de Villefort has been telling me?” demanded Monte
Cristo “and what incomprehensible misfortune——”

“Yes,” said Madame de Villefort; “and it is still entirely in the power
of my husband to cause the will, which is now in prejudice of Valentine,
to be altered in her favor.”

The count, who perceived that M. and Madame de Villefort were beginning
to speak in parables, appeared to pay no attention to the conversation,
and feigned to be busily engaged in watching Edward, who was
mischievously pouring some ink into the bird’s water-glass.

“My dear,” said Villefort, in answer to his wife, “you know I have never
been accustomed to play the patriarch in my family, nor have I ever
considered that the fate of a universe was to be decided by my nod.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that my will should be respected in my
family, and that the folly of an old man and the caprice of a child
should not be allowed to overturn a project which I have entertained for
so many years. The Baron d’Épinay was my friend, as you know, and an
alliance with his son is the most suitable thing that could possibly be
arranged.”

“Do you think,” said Madame de Villefort, “that Valentine is in league
with him? She has always been opposed to this marriage, and I should not
be at all surprised if what we have just seen and heard is nothing but
the execution of a plan concerted between them.”

“Madame,” said Villefort, “believe me, a fortune of 900,000 francs is
not so easily renounced.”

“Never mind,” replied Villefort; “I say that this marriage shall be
consummated.”

“Notwithstanding your father’s wishes to the contrary?” said Madame de
Villefort, selecting a new point of attack. “That is a serious thing.”

“Madame,” replied Villefort “I can truly say that I have always
entertained a high respect for my father, because, to the natural
feeling of relationship was added the consciousness of his moral
superiority. The name of father is sacred in two senses; he should be
reverenced as the author of our being and as a master whom we ought to
obey. But, under the present circumstances, I am justified in doubting
the wisdom of an old man who, because he hated the father, vents his
anger on the son. It would be ridiculous in me to regulate my conduct by
such caprices. I shall still continue to preserve the same respect
toward M. Noirtier; I will suffer, without complaint, the pecuniary
deprivation to which he has subjected me; but I shall remain firm in my
determination, and the world shall see which party has reason on his
side. Consequently I shall marry my daughter to the Baron Franz
d’Épinay, because I consider it would be a proper and eligible match for
her to make, and, in short, because I choose to bestow my daughter’s
hand on whomever I please.”

“What?” said the count, the approbation of whose eye Villefort had
frequently solicited during this speech. “What? Do you say that M.
Noirtier disinherits Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to
marry M. le Baron Franz d’Épinay?”

“Yes, sir, that is the reason,” said Villefort, shrugging his shoulders.

“The apparent reason, at least,” said Madame de Villefort.

“The same,” said Villefort.

“He is, which makes me believe that it is only an excuse of M. Noirtier
to prevent his granddaughter marrying; old men are always so selfish in
their affection,” said Madame de Villefort.

“My father and the Baron d’Épinay lived in the stormy times of which I
only saw the ending,” said Villefort.

“My father has been a Jacobin more than anything else,” said Villefort,
carried by his emotion beyond the bounds of prudence; “and the senator’s
robe, which Napoleon cast on his shoulders, only served to disguise the
old man without in any degree changing him. When my father conspired, it
was not for the emperor, it was against the Bourbons; for M. Noirtier
possessed this peculiarity, he never projected any Utopian schemes which
could never be realized, but strove for possibilities, and he applied to
the realization of these possibilities the terrible theories of The
Mountain,—theories that never shrank from any means that were deemed
necessary to bring about the desired result.”

Villefort looked at the count almost with terror.

“No, sir, the facts were precisely what you have stated,” said Madame de
Villefort; “and it was to prevent the renewal of old feuds that M. de
Villefort formed the idea of uniting in the bonds of affection the two
children of these inveterate enemies.”

“It was a sublime and charitable thought,” said Monte Cristo, “and the
whole world should applaud it. It would be noble to see Mademoiselle
Noirtier de Villefort assuming the title of Madame Franz d’Épinay.”

Villefort shuddered and looked at Monte Cristo as if he wished to read
in his countenance the real feelings which had dictated the words he had
just uttered. But the count completely baffled the procureur, and
prevented him from discovering anything beneath the never-varying smile
he was so constantly in the habit of assuming.

“Although,” said Villefort, “it will be a serious thing for Valentine to
lose her grandfather’s fortune, I do not think that M. d’Épinay will be
frightened at this pecuniary loss. He will, perhaps, hold me in greater
esteem than the money itself, seeing that I sacrifice everything in
order to keep my word with him. Besides, he knows that Valentine is rich
in right of her mother, and that she will, in all probability, inherit
the fortune of M. and Madame de Saint-Méran, her mother’s parents, who
both love her tenderly.”

“And who are fully as well worth loving and tending as M. Noirtier,”
said Madame de Villefort; “besides, they are to come to Paris in about a
month, and Valentine, after the affront she has received, need not
consider it necessary to continue to bury herself alive by being shut up
with M. Noirtier.”

“But it seems to me,” said Monte Cristo, “and I must begin by asking
your pardon for what I am about to say, that if M. Noirtier disinherits
Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to marry a man whose
father he detested, he cannot have the same cause of complaint against
this dear Edward.”

“True,” said Madame de Villefort, with an intonation of voice which it
is impossible to describe; “is it not unjust—shamefully unjust? Poor
Edward is as much M. Noirtier’s grandchild as Valentine, and yet, if she
had not been going to marry M. Franz, M. Noirtier would have left her
all his money; and supposing Valentine to be disinherited by her
grandfather, she will still be three times richer than he.”

“Count,” said Villefort, “we will not entertain you any longer with our
family misfortunes. It is true that my patrimony will go to endow
charitable institutions, and my father will have deprived me of my
lawful inheritance without any reason for doing so, but I shall have the
satisfaction of knowing that I have acted like a man of sense and
feeling. M. d’Épinay, to whom I had promised the interest of this sum,
shall receive it, even if I endure the most cruel privations.”

“However,” said Madame de Villefort, returning to the one idea which
incessantly occupied her mind, “perhaps it would be better to explain
this unlucky affair to M. d’Épinay, in order to give him the opportunity
of himself renouncing his claim to the hand of Mademoiselle de
Villefort.”

“Ah, that would be a great pity,” said Villefort.

“Undoubtedly,” said Villefort, moderating the tones of his voice, “a
marriage once concerted and then broken off, throws a sort of discredit
on a young lady; then again, the old reports, which I was so anxious to
put an end to, will instantly gain ground. No, it will all go well; M.
d’Épinay, if he is an honorable man, will consider himself more than
ever pledged to Mademoiselle de Villefort, unless he were actuated by a
decided feeling of avarice, but that is impossible.”

“I agree with M. de Villefort,” said Monte Cristo, fixing his eyes on
Madame de Villefort; “and if I were sufficiently intimate with him to
allow of giving my advice, I would persuade him, since I have been told
M. d’Épinay is coming back, to settle this affair at once beyond all
possibility of revocation. I will answer for the success of a project
which will reflect so much honor on M. de Villefort.”

“Sir,” said the count, “the world, unjust as it is, will be pleased with
your resolution; your friends will be proud of you, and M. d’Épinay,
even if he took Mademoiselle de Villefort without any dowry, which he
will not do, would be delighted with the idea of entering a family which
could make such sacrifices in order to keep a promise and fulfil a
duty.”

“Are you going to leave us, count?” said Madame de Villefort.

“You are very good, madame, but M. de Villefort has so many important
and urgent occupations.”

“My husband has given me his word, sir,” said Madame de Villefort; “you
have just seen him resolve to keep it when he has everything to lose,
and surely there is more reason for his doing so where he has everything
to gain.”

“And,” said Villefort, “is it at your house in the Champs-Élysées that
you receive your visitors?”

“At Auteuil?” said Villefort; “true, Madame de Villefort told me you
lived at Auteuil, since it was to your house that she was taken. And in
what part of Auteuil do you reside?”

“Rue de la Fontaine!” exclaimed Villefort in an agitated tone; “at what
number?”

“Then,” cried Villefort, “was it you who bought M. de Saint-Méran’s
house!”

“Yes,” replied Madame de Villefort; “and, would you believe it, count——”

“Indeed?” returned Monte Cristo, “that is a prejudice on your part, M.
de Villefort, for which I am quite at a loss to account.”

“No, count,—I hope—I assure you I shall do my best,” stammered
Villefort.

“I will come, count,—I will be sure to come,” said Villefort eagerly.

“You said before that you were obliged to leave us, monsieur,” said
Madame de Villefort, “and you were about to tell us why when your
attention was called to some other subject.”

“A telegraph?” repeated Madame de Villefort.

“You are a singular man,” said Villefort.

“M. and Madame de Villefort,” cried Baptistin.

They entered. M. de Villefort, notwithstanding his self-control, was
visibly affected, and when Monte Cristo touched his hand, he felt it
tremble.

“Waiting for whom?” Bertuccio, without answering, pointed to Villefort
with something of the gesture Macbeth uses to point out Banquo.

“Him!—M. de Villefort, the king’s attorney? Certainly I see him.”

“No; you see plainly he is not dead. Instead of striking between the
sixth and seventh left ribs, as your countrymen do, you must have struck
higher or lower, and life is very tenacious in these lawyers, or rather
there is no truth in anything you have told me—it was a fright of the
imagination, a dream of your fancy. You went to sleep full of thoughts
of vengeance; they weighed heavily upon your stomach; you had the
nightmare—that’s all. Come, calm yourself, and reckon them up—M. and
Madame de Villefort, two; M. and Madame Danglars, four; M. de Château-
Renaud, M. Debray, M. Morrel, seven; Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti,
eight.”

The Count of Monte Cristo offered his arm to Madame de Villefort. “M. de
Villefort,” he said, “will you conduct the Baroness Danglars?”

Villefort complied, and they passed on to the dining-room.

And all present, even including Cavalcanti and his son, notwithstanding
the stiffness of the one and the carelessness of the other, were
thoughtful, on finding themselves assembled at the house of this
incomprehensible man. Madame Danglars had started when Villefort, on the
count’s invitation, offered his arm; and Villefort felt that his glance
was uneasy beneath his gold spectacles, when he felt the arm of the
baroness press upon his own. None of this had escaped the count, and
even by this mere contact of individuals the scene had already acquired
considerable interest for an observer.

M. de Villefort had on the right hand Madame Danglars, on his left
Morrel. The count was seated between Madame de Villefort and Danglars;
the other seats were filled by Debray, who was placed between the two
Cavalcanti, and by Château-Renaud, seated between Madame de Villefort
and Morrel.

“Gentlemen,” he said, “you will admit that, when arrived at a certain
degree of fortune, the superfluities of life are all that can be
desired; and the ladies will allow that, after having risen to a certain
eminence of position, the ideal alone can be more exalted. Now, to
follow out this reasoning, what is the marvellous?—that which we do not
understand. What is it that we really desire?—that which we cannot
obtain. Now, to see things which I cannot understand, to procure
impossibilities, these are the study of my life. I gratify my wishes by
two means—my will and my money. I take as much interest in the pursuit
of some whim as you do, M. Danglars, in promoting a new railway line;
you, M. de Villefort, in condemning a culprit to death; you, M. Debray,
in pacifying a kingdom; you, M. de Château-Renaud, in pleasing a woman;
and you, Morrel, in breaking a horse that no one can ride. For example,
you see these two fish; one brought from fifty leagues beyond St.
Petersburg, the other five leagues from Naples. Is it not amusing to see
them both on the same table?”

“Yes,” said Madame de Villefort, “the door was towards the road before,
and on the day of my miraculous escape you brought me into the house
from the road, I remember.”

“M. de Saint-Méran?” said Madame de Villefort; “then this house belonged
to M. de Saint-Méran before you bought it?”

Villefort, who had hitherto not tasted the three or four glasses of rare
wine which were placed before him, here took one, and drank it off.
Monte Cristo allowed a short time to elapse, and then said:

“It is probable,” stammered out Villefort, trying to smile; “but I can
assure you that I had nothing to do with any such proceeding. This house
is part of Valentine’s marriage-portion, and M. de Saint-Méran wished to
sell it; for if it had remained another year or two uninhabited it would
have fallen to ruin.”

Monte Cristo looked inquiringly at his guests. Madame de Villefort rose,
Monte Cristo did the same, and the rest followed their example.
Villefort and Madame Danglars remained for a moment, as if rooted to
their seats; they questioned each other with vague and stupid glances.

“We must go,” replied Villefort, offering his arm.

“Oh.” cried Madame de Villefort, “it is really frightful.”

Villefort became livid; Madame Danglars fell into a long seat placed
near the chimney.

“Oh,” said Madame de Villefort, smiling, “are you courageous enough to
sit down upon the very seat perhaps upon which the crime was committed?”

Madame Danglars half fainted on the arm of Villefort, who was obliged to
support himself against the wall.

“It is very evident what is the matter with her,” said Madame de
Villefort; “M. de Monte Cristo is relating horrible stories to us,
doubtless intending to frighten us to death.”

“Yes,” said Villefort, “really, count, you frighten the ladies.”

“Madame Danglars is ill,” said Villefort; “it would be better to take
her to her carriage.”

“I have mine,” said Madame de Villefort; and she passed over to Monte
Cristo a bottle full of the same kind of red liquid whose good
properties the count had tested on Edward.

Villefort pressed her hand to let her know it was not a dream. They
looked for M. Danglars, but, as he was not especially interested in
poetical ideas, he had gone into the garden, and was talking with Major
Cavalcanti on the projected railway from Leghorn to Florence. Monte
Cristo seemed in despair. He took the arm of Madame Danglars, and
conducted her into the garden, where they found Danglars taking coffee
between the Cavalcanti.

“Oh, no, sir,” she answered; “but you know, things impress us
differently, according to the mood of our minds.” Villefort forced a
laugh.

“Take care,” said Madame de Villefort, “the king’s attorney is here.”

“Your declaration?” said Villefort.

“There has been a crime,” said Monte Cristo. “Come this way, gentlemen;
come, M. Villefort, for a declaration to be available, should be made
before the competent authorities.”

He then took Villefort’s arm, and, at the same time, holding that of
Madame Danglars under his own, he dragged the procureur to the plantain-
tree, where the shade was thickest. All the other guests followed.

Monte Cristo felt the arm of Madame Danglars stiffen, while that of
Villefort trembled.

“Who said it was a crime?” asked Villefort, with a last effort.

“I think so; am I not right, M. de Villefort?” asked Monte Cristo.

“Yes, count,” replied Villefort, in a voice now scarcely human.

Monte Cristo bowed, and went to Madame de Villefort.

“I think Madame Danglars again requires your bottle,” he said. But
before Madame de Villefort could reach her friend, the procureur had
found time to whisper to Madame Danglars, “I must speak to you.”

At this moment Madame de Villefort approached.

The evening passed on; Madame de Villefort expressed a desire to return
to Paris, which Madame Danglars had not dared to do, notwithstanding the
uneasiness she experienced. On his wife’s request, M. de Villefort was
the first to give the signal of departure. He offered a seat in his
landau to Madame Danglars, that she might be under the care of his wife.
As for M. Danglars, absorbed in an interesting conversation with M.
Cavalcanti, he paid no attention to anything that was passing. While
Monte Cristo had begged the smelling-bottle of Madame de Villefort, he
had noticed the approach of Villefort to Madame Danglars, and he soon
guessed all that had passed between them, though the words had been
uttered in so low a voice as hardly to be heard by Madame Danglars.
Without opposing their arrangements, he allowed Morrel, Château-Renaud,
and Debray to leave on horseback, and the ladies in M. de Villefort’s
carriage. Danglars, more and more delighted with Major Cavalcanti, had
offered him a seat in his carriage. Andrea Cavalcanti found his tilbury
waiting at the door; the groom, in every respect a caricature of the
English fashion, was standing on tiptoe to hold a large iron-gray horse.

At the Place Louis XV. the three young people separated—that is to say,
Morrel went to the Boulevards, Château-Renaud to the Pont de la
Révolution, and Debray to the Quai. Most probably Morrel and Château-
Renaud returned to their “domestic hearths,” as they say in the gallery
of the Chamber in well-turned speeches, and in the theatre of the Rue
Richelieu in well-written pieces; but it was not the case with Debray.
When he reached the wicket of the Louvre, he turned to the left,
galloped across the Carrousel, passed through the Rue Saint-Roch, and,
issuing from the Rue de la Michodière, he arrived at M. Danglars’ door
just at the same time that Villefort’s landau, after having deposited
him and his wife at the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, stopped to leave the
baroness at her own house.

Danglars shrugged his shoulders. “Foolish creature,” he exclaimed.
“Women fancy they have talent because they have managed two or three
intrigues without being the talk of Paris! But know that if you had even
hidden your irregularities from your husband, who has but the
commencement of the art—for generally husbands will not see—you would
then have been but a faint imitation of most of your friends among the
women of the world. But it has not been so with me,—I see, and always
have seen, during the last sixteen years. You may, perhaps, have hidden
a thought; but not a step, not an action, not a fault, has escaped me,
while you flattered yourself upon your address, and firmly believed you
had deceived me. What has been the result?—that, thanks to my pretended
ignorance, there is none of your friends, from M. de Villefort to M.
Debray, who has not trembled before me. There is not one who has not
treated me as the master of the house,—the only title I desire with
respect to you; there is not one, in fact, who would have dared to speak
of me as I have spoken of them this day. I will allow you to make me
hateful, but I will prevent your rendering me ridiculous, and, above
all, I forbid you to ruin me.”

The baroness had been tolerably composed until the name of Villefort had
been pronounced; but then she became pale, and, rising, as if touched by
a spring, she stretched out her hands as though conjuring an apparition;
she then took two or three steps towards her husband, as though to tear
the secret from him, of which he was ignorant, or which he withheld from
some odious calculation,—odious, as all his calculations were.

“M. de Villefort!—What do you mean?”

Madame Danglars was rooted to the spot; she made a violent effort to
reply to this last attack, but she fell upon a chair thinking of
Villefort, of the dinner scene, of the strange series of misfortunes
which had taken place in her house during the last few days, and changed
the usual calm of her establishment to a scene of scandalous debate.

There was a great press of people in M. de Villefort’s antechamber, but
Madame Danglars had no occasion even to pronounce her name. The instant
she appeared the door-keeper rose, came to her, and asked her whether
she was not the person with whom the procureur had made an appointment;
and on her affirmative answer being given, he conducted her by a private
passage to M. de Villefort’s office.

“Nevertheless, sir, you see I have answered your first appeal, although
certainly the conversation must be much more painful for me than for
you.” Villefort smiled bitterly.

Villefort dropped his head and sighed.

“Madame,” replied Villefort, “you know that I am no hypocrite, or, at
least, that I never deceive without a reason. If my brow be severe, it
is because many misfortunes have clouded it; if my heart be petrified,
it is that it might sustain the blows it has received. I was not so in
my youth, I was not so on the night of the betrothal, when we were all
seated around a table in the Rue du Cours at Marseilles. But since then
everything has changed in and about me; I am accustomed to brave
difficulties, and, in the conflict to crush those who, by their own free
will, or by chance, voluntarily or involuntarily, interfere with me in
my career. It is generally the case that what we most ardently desire is
as ardently withheld from us by those who wish to obtain it, or from
whom we attempt to snatch it. Thus, the greater number of a man’s errors
come before him disguised under the specious form of necessity; then,
after error has been committed in a moment of excitement, of delirium,
or of fear, we see that we might have avoided and escaped it. The means
we might have used, which we in our blindness could not see, then seem
simple and easy, and we say, ‘Why did I not do this, instead of that?’
Women, on the contrary, are rarely tormented with remorse; for the
decision does not come from you,—your misfortunes are generally imposed
upon you, and your faults the results of others’ crimes.”

“Poor thing,” said Villefort, pressing her hand, “it was too severe for
your strength, for you were twice overwhelmed, and yet——”

The baroness knew how calm Villefort naturally was, and his present
excitement frightened her so much that she opened her mouth to scream,
but the sound died in her throat.

“How has this terrible past been recalled?” cried Villefort; “how is it
that it has escaped from the depths of the tomb and the recesses of our
hearts, where it was buried, to visit us now, like a phantom, whitening
our cheeks and flushing our brows with shame?”

“Chance?” replied Villefort; “No, no, madame, there is no such thing as
chance.”

“Well, no, madame,—this is the terrible news I have to tell you,” said
Villefort in a hollow voice—“no, nothing was found beneath the flowers;
there was no child disinterred—no. You must not weep, no, you must not
groan, you must tremble!”

“No,” said Villefort, burying his face in his hands, “no, a hundred
times no!”

Madame Danglars moved rapidly, as though she would spring from her
chair, but Villefort stopped, and clasped his hands as if to implore her
attention.

“We thought it dead,” he repeated; “I placed it in the chest, which was
to take the place of a coffin; I descended to the garden, I dug a hole,
and then flung it down in haste. Scarcely had I covered it with earth,
when the arm of the Corsican was stretched towards me; I saw a shadow
rise, and, at the same time, a flash of light. I felt pain; I wished to
cry out, but an icy shiver ran through my veins and stifled my voice; I
fell lifeless, and fancied myself killed. Never shall I forget your
sublime courage, when, having returned to consciousness, I dragged
myself to the foot of the stairs, and you, almost dying yourself, came
to meet me. We were obliged to keep silent upon the dreadful
catastrophe. You had the fortitude to regain the house, assisted by your
nurse. A duel was the pretext for my wound. Though we scarcely expected
it, our secret remained in our own keeping alone. I was taken to
Versailles; for three months I struggled with death; at last, as I
seemed to cling to life, I was ordered to the South. Four men carried me
from Paris to Châlons, walking six leagues a day; Madame de Villefort
followed the litter in her carriage. At Châlons I was put upon the
Saône, thence I passed on to the Rhône, whence I descended, merely with
the current, to Arles; at Arles I was again placed on my litter, and
continued my journey to Marseilles. My recovery lasted six months. I
never heard you mentioned, and I did not dare inquire for you. When I
returned to Paris, I learned that you, the widow of M. de Nargonne, had
married M. Danglars.

“Think not I contented myself with this one effort,” continued
Villefort. “No; I searched the whole thicket. I thought the assassin,
having discovered the chest, and supposing it to be a treasure, had
intended carrying it off, but, perceiving his error, had dug another
hole, and deposited it there; but I could find nothing. Then the idea
struck me that he had not taken these precautions, and had simply thrown
it in a corner. In the last case I must wait for daylight to renew my
search. I remained in the room and waited.”

“I hoped for a moment that it might,” said Villefort; “but that
happiness was denied me. However, recovering my strength and my ideas,
‘Why,’ said I, ‘should that man have carried away the corpse?’”

Madame Danglars uttered a piercing cry, and, seizing Villefort’s hands,
exclaimed, “My child was alive?” said she; “you buried my child alive?
You were not certain my child was dead, and you buried it? Ah——”

“I know not; I merely suppose so, as I might suppose anything else,”
replied Villefort with a look so fixed, it indicated that his powerful
mind was on the verge of despair and madness.

“Ah, my child, my poor child!” cried the baroness, falling on her chair,
and stifling her sobs in her handkerchief. Villefort, becoming somewhat
reassured, perceived that to avert the maternal storm gathering over his
head, he must inspire Madame Danglars with the terror he felt.

Villefort’s only answer was a stifled groan.

“How I have searched for him,” replied Villefort, wringing his hands;
“how I have called him in my long sleepless nights; how I have longed
for royal wealth to purchase a million of secrets from a million of men,
and to find mine among them! At last, one day, when for the hundredth
time I took up my spade, I asked myself again and again what the
Corsican could have done with the child. A child encumbers a fugitive;
perhaps, on perceiving it was still alive, he had thrown it into the
river.”

“Perhaps,” continued Villefort, “he had put it in the foundling
hospital.”

Villefort shrugged his shoulders.

“Oh, no,” said Villefort; “I never ceased to search and to inquire.
However, the last two or three years I had allowed myself some respite.
But now I will begin with more perseverance and fury than ever, since
fear urges me, not my conscience.”

“Oh, the wickedness of man is very great,” said Villefort, “since it
surpasses the goodness of God. Did you observe that man’s eyes while he
was speaking to us?”

“But believe me, that man has other projects. For that reason I wished
to see you, to speak to you, to warn you against everyone, but
especially against him. Tell me,” cried Villefort, fixing his eyes more
steadfastly on her than he had ever done before, “did you ever reveal to
anyone our connection?”

“You understand me,” replied Villefort, affectionately; “when I say
anyone,—pardon my urgency,—to anyone living I mean?”

The color mounted to the baroness’s face, and Villefort turned awfully
pale.

“Well, I understand what I now have to do,” replied Villefort. “In less
than one week from this time I will ascertain who this M. de Monte
Cristo is, whence he comes, where he goes, and why he speaks in our
presence of children that have been disinterred in a garden.”

Villefort pronounced these words with an accent which would have made
the count shudder had he heard him. Then he pressed the hand the
baroness reluctantly gave him, and led her respectfully back to the
door. Madame Danglars returned in another cab to the passage, on the
other side of which she found her carriage, and her coachman sleeping
peacefully on his box while waiting for her.

“Yes, with Count Cavalcanti, the marquis his father, Madame Danglars, M.
and Madame de Villefort,—charming people,—M. Debray, Maximilian Morrel,
and M. de Château-Renaud.”

“Yes; summoned by M. de Villefort, who is apparently as anxious to get
Mademoiselle Valentine married as M. Danglars is to see Mademoiselle
Eugénie settled. It must be a very irksome office to be the father of a
grown-up daughter; it seems to make one feverish, and to raise one’s
pulse to ninety beats a minute until the deed is done.”

“Still more, he talks seriously about the matter, puts on a white tie,
and speaks of his family. He entertains a very high opinion of M. and
Madame de Villefort.”

“I believe they do. M. de Villefort has always passed for a severe but a
just man.”

“He has already been invited by my father. We shall try to persuade the
great d’Aguesseau,11 M. de Villefort, to come, but have not much hope of
seeing him.”

M. de Villefort kept the promise he had made to Madame Danglars, to
endeavor to find out how the Count of Monte Cristo had discovered the
history of the house at Auteuil. He wrote the same day for the required
information to M. de Boville, who, from having been an inspector of
prisons, was promoted to a high office in the police; and the latter
begged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would be most likely
to give him full particulars. At the end of the second day M. de
Villefort received the following note:

M. de Villefort replied by ordering the strictest inquiries to be made
respecting these two persons; his orders were executed, and the
following evening he received these details:

The abbé once more bowed as he opened the door, the stranger bowed and
took his leave, and the carriage conveyed him straight to the house of
M. de Villefort. An hour afterwards the carriage was again ordered, and
this time it went to the Rue Fontaine-Saint-Georges, and stopped at No.
5, where Lord Wilmore lived. The stranger had written to Lord Wilmore,
requesting an interview, which the latter had fixed for ten o’clock. As
the envoy of the prefect of police arrived ten minutes before ten, he
was told that Lord Wilmore, who was precision and punctuality
personified, was not yet come in, but that he would be sure to return as
the clock struck.

It was M. de Villefort, and not the prefect, who returned to the house
of M. de Villefort. The procureur felt more at ease, although he had
learned nothing really satisfactory, and, for the first time since the
dinner-party at Auteuil, he slept soundly.

Madame Danglars, in whom the events we have related had caused deep
anxiety, had hesitated about going to Madame de Morcerf’s, when during
the morning her carriage happened to meet that of Villefort. The latter
made a sign, and when the carriages had drawn close together, said:

“You are wrong,” replied Villefort, significantly; “it is important that
you should be seen there.”

“Calm yourself. She has met Mademoiselle de Villefort, and has taken her
arm; see, they are following us, both in white dresses, one with a
bouquet of camellias, the other with one of myosotis. But tell me——”

“Wait; leave me here, and go and speak to Madame de Villefort, who is
trying to attract your attention.”

Albert bowed to Madame Danglars, and advanced towards Madame de
Villefort, whose lips opened as he approached.

Just then, a handsome young man, with bright eyes, black hair, and
glossy moustache, respectfully bowed to Madame de Villefort. Albert
extended his hand.

“I have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentleman at Auteuil,
at the house of the Count of Monte Cristo,” replied Madame de Villefort,
turning away with marked coldness of manner.

“M. de Villefort is here.”

“Because Madame de Saint-Méran is just arrived in Paris, bringing the
news of M. de Saint-Méran’s death, which took place on the first stage
after he left Marseilles. Madame de Villefort, who was in very good
spirits, would neither believe nor think of the misfortune, but
Mademoiselle Valentine, at the first words, guessed the whole truth,
notwithstanding all the precautions of her father; the blow struck her
like a thunderbolt, and she fell senseless.”

“And how was M. de Saint-Méran related to Mademoiselle de Villefort?”
said the count.

They re-entered the drawing-room, which Valentine and Madame de
Villefort had just quitted. It is perhaps needless to add that Morrel
departed almost at the same time.

A gloomy scene had indeed just passed at the house of M. de Villefort.
After the ladies had departed for the ball, whither all the entreaties
of Madame de Villefort had failed in persuading him to accompany them,
the procureur had shut himself up in his study, according to his custom,
with a heap of papers calculated to alarm anyone else, but which
generally scarcely satisfied his inordinate desires.

But this time the papers were a mere matter of form. Villefort had
secluded himself, not to study, but to reflect; and with the door locked
and orders given that he should not be disturbed excepting for important
business, he sat down in his armchair and began to ponder over the
events, the remembrance of which had during the last eight days filled
his mind with so many gloomy thoughts and bitter recollections.

“But why should he wish to enlighten himself upon the subject?” asked
Villefort, after a moment’s reflection, “what interest can this M. de
Monte Cristo or M. Zaccone,—son of a shipowner of Malta, discoverer of a
mine in Thessaly, now visiting Paris for the first time,—what interest,
I say, can he take in discovering a gloomy, mysterious, and useless fact
like this? However, among all the incoherent details given to me by the
Abbé Busoni and by Lord Wilmore, by that friend and that enemy, one
thing appears certain and clear in my opinion—that in no period, in no
case, in no circumstance, could there have been any contact between him
and me.”

But Villefort uttered words which even he himself did not believe. He
dreaded not so much the revelation, for he could reply to or deny its
truth;—he cared little for that mene, mene, tekel upharsin, which
appeared suddenly in letters of blood upon the wall;—but what he was
really anxious for was to discover whose hand had traced them. While he
was endeavoring to calm his fears,—and instead of dwelling upon the
political future that had so often been the subject of his ambitious
dreams, was imagining a future limited to the enjoyments of home, in
fear of awakening the enemy that had so long slept,—the noise of a
carriage sounded in the yard, then he heard the steps of an aged person
ascending the stairs, followed by tears and lamentations, such as
servants always give vent to when they wish to appear interested in
their master’s grief.

And then, falling upon the chair nearest the door, she burst into a
paroxysm of sobs. The servants, standing in the doorway, not daring to
approach nearer, were looking at Noirtier’s old servant, who had heard
the noise from his master’s room, and run there also, remaining behind
the others. Villefort rose, and ran towards his mother-in-law, for it
was she.

“M. de Saint-Méran is dead,” answered the old marchioness, without
preface and without expression; she appeared to be stupefied. Villefort
drew back, and clasping his hands together, exclaimed:

Villefort stood with his mouth half open, quite stupefied.

“Oh! my poor mother!” said Villefort, “to have such duties to perform at
your age after such a blow!”

Villefort thought it would be terrible to reply that Valentine was at a
ball; so he only said that she had gone out with her step-mother, and
that she should be fetched. “This instant, sir—this instant, I beseech
you!” said the old lady. Villefort placed the arm of Madame de Saint-
Méran within his own, and conducted her to his apartment.

The marchioness raised her head at this word, and beholding the man who
so forcibly reminded her of her deeply-regretted child, who still lived
for her in Valentine, she felt touched at the name of mother, and
bursting into tears, she fell on her knees before an armchair, where she
buried her venerable head. Villefort left her to the care of the women,
while old Barrois ran, half-scared, to his master; for nothing frightens
old people so much as when death relaxes its vigilance over them for a
moment in order to strike some other old person. Then, while Madame de
Saint-Méran remained on her knees, praying fervently, Villefort sent for
a cab, and went himself to fetch his wife and daughter from Madame de
Morcerf’s. He was so pale when he appeared at the door of the ball-room,
that Valentine ran to him, saying:

“Your grandmamma has just arrived, Valentine,” said M. de Villefort.

“And grandpapa?” inquired the young girl, trembling with apprehension.
M. de Villefort only replied by offering his arm to his daughter. It was
just in time, for Valentine’s head swam, and she staggered; Madame de
Villefort instantly hastened to her assistance, and aided her husband in
dragging her to the carriage, saying:

Valentine found her grandmother in bed; silent caresses, heartwrung
sobs, broken sighs, burning tears, were all that passed in this sad
interview, while Madame de Villefort, leaning on her husband’s arm,
maintained all outward forms of respect, at least towards the poor
widow. She soon whispered to her husband:

Madame de Villefort left, and Valentine remained alone beside the bed,
for the procureur, overcome with astonishment at the unexpected death,
had followed his wife. Meanwhile, Barrois had returned for the first
time to old Noirtier, who having heard the noise in the house, had, as
we have said, sent his old servant to inquire the cause; on his return,
his quick intelligent eye interrogated the messenger.

Valentine durst not oppose her grandmother’s wish, the cause of which
she did not know, and an instant afterwards Villefort entered.

“Yes, madame,” replied Villefort, “it is not only projected but
arranged.”

“Our civil dissensions are now happily extinguished, mother,” said
Villefort; “M. d’Épinay was quite a child when his father died, he knows
very little of M. Noirtier, and will meet him, if not with pleasure, at
least with indifference.”

“You, madame?” “You, dear mamma?” exclaimed M. de Villefort and
Valentine at the same time.

“Ah, madame,” said Villefort, “you forget that I was obliged to give a
mother to my child.”

“It shall be as you wish, madame,” said Villefort; “more especially
since your wishes coincide with mine, and as soon as M. d’Épinay arrives
in Paris——”

“Still that idea of death, madame,” said Villefort.

“Madame,” said Villefort, “you must lay aside these exalted ideas, which
almost assume the appearance of madness. The dead, once buried in their
graves, rise no more.”

“And I tell you, sir, that you are mistaken. This night I have had a
fearful sleep. It seemed as though my soul were already hovering over my
body, my eyes, which I tried to open, closed against my will, and what
will appear impossible above all to you, sir, I saw, with my eyes shut,
in the spot where you are now standing, issuing from that corner where
there is a door leading into Madame Villefort’s dressing-room—I saw, I
tell you, silently enter, a white figure.”

“It was the fever that disturbed you, madame,” said Villefort.

“Oh, madame,” said Villefort, deeply affected, in spite of himself, “do
not yield to those gloomy thoughts; you will long live with us, happy,
loved, and honored, and we will make you forget——”

M. de Villefort left the room, and Valentine seated herself at the
bedside of her grandmother. The poor child appeared herself to require
the doctor she had recommended to her aged relative. A bright spot
burned in either cheek, her respiration was short and difficult, and her
pulse beat with feverish excitement. She was thinking of the despair of
Maximilian, when he should be informed that Madame de Saint-Méran,
instead of being an ally, was unconsciously acting as his enemy.

“Antoinette is very well,” he said, “and Madeleine tolerably so. But you
sent for me, my dear child. It is not your father or Madame de Villefort
who is ill. As for you, although we doctors cannot divest our patients
of nerves, I fancy you have no further need of me than to recommend you
not to allow your imagination to take too wide a field.”

It was indeed Maximilian Morrel, who had passed a wretched existence
since the previous day. With the instinct peculiar to lovers he had
anticipated after the return of Madame de Saint-Méran and the death of
the marquis, that something would occur at M. de Villefort’s in
connection with his attachment for Valentine. His presentiments were
realized, as we shall see, and his uneasy forebodings had goaded him
pale and trembling to the gate under the chestnut-trees.

“You mistake—I understand you perfectly. You will not oppose M.
Villefort, you will not displease the marchioness, and tomorrow you will
sign the contract which will bind you to your husband.”

“Valentine de Villefort.”

Morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news that the contract
was to be signed that evening. Then he went to call on Monte Cristo and
heard still more. Franz had been to announce the ceremony, and Madame de
Villefort had also written to beg the count to excuse her not inviting
him; the death of M. de Saint-Méran and the dangerous illness of his
widow would cast a gloom over the meeting which she would regret should
be shared by the count whom she wished every happiness.

At last the half-hour struck. It was impossible to wait longer, his
temples throbbed violently, his eyes were growing dim; he passed one leg
over the wall, and in a moment leaped down on the other side. He was on
Villefort’s premises—had arrived there by scaling the wall. What might
be the consequences? However, he had not ventured thus far to draw back.
He followed a short distance close under the wall, then crossed a path,
hid entered a clump of trees. In a moment he had passed through them,
and could see the house distinctly.

Then Morrel saw that he had been right in believing that the house was
not illuminated. Instead of lights at every window, as is customary on
days of ceremony, he saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a
cloud, which at that moment obscured the moon’s feeble light. A light
moved rapidly from time to time past three windows of the second floor.
These three windows were in Madame de Saint-Méran’s room. Another
remained motionless behind some red curtains which were in Madame de
Villefort’s bedroom. Morrel guessed all this. So many times, in order to
follow Valentine in thought at every hour in the day, had he made her
describe the whole house, that without having seen it he knew it all.

The moon had just then escaped from behind the cloud which had concealed
it, and Morrel saw Villefort come out upon the steps, followed by a
gentleman in black. They descended, and advanced towards the clump of
trees, and Morrel soon recognized the other gentleman as Doctor
d’Avrigny.

The cold sweat sprang to the young man’s brow, and his teeth chattered.
Who could be dead in that house, which Villefort himself had called
accursed?

“My dear M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, with a tone which
redoubled the terror of the young man, “I have not led you here to
console you; on the contrary——”

“Can it be possible?” murmured Villefort, clasping his hands. “What are
you going to tell me?”

Villefort fell, rather than seated himself. The doctor stood before him,
with one hand placed on his shoulder. Morrel, horrified, supported his
head with one hand, and with the other pressed his heart, lest its
beatings should be heard. “Dead, dead!” repeated he within himself; and
he felt as if he were also dying.

“Speak, doctor—I am listening,” said Villefort; “strike—I am prepared
for everything!”

“Grief has consumed her,” said Villefort—“yes, grief, doctor! After
living forty years with the marquis——”

“It is not grief, my dear Villefort,” said the doctor; “grief may kill,
although it rarely does, and never in a day, never in an hour, never in
ten minutes.” Villefort answered nothing, he simply raised his head,
which had been cast down before, and looked at the doctor with
amazement.

M. de Villefort started from his seat, then in a moment fell down again,
silent and motionless. Morrel knew not if he were dreaming or awake.

“Do you speak to me as a magistrate or as a friend?” asked Villefort.

Villefort seized the doctor’s hand.

“No, I did not say of poison, but we can prove what was the state of the
body; we shall discover the cause of her sudden death, and we shall say,
‘Dear Villefort, if this thing has been caused by negligence, watch over
your servants; if from hatred, watch your enemies.’”

“What do you propose to me, d’Avrigny?” said Villefort in despair; “so
soon as another is admitted into our secret, an inquest will become
necessary; and an inquest in my house—impossible! Still,” continued the
procureur, looking at the doctor with uneasiness, “if you wish it—if you
demand it, why then it shall be done. But, doctor, you see me already so
grieved—how can I introduce into my house so much scandal, after so much
sorrow? My wife and my daughter would die of it! And I, doctor—you know
a man does not arrive at the post I occupy—one has not been king’s
attorney twenty-five years without having amassed a tolerable number of
enemies; mine are numerous. Let this affair be talked of, it will be a
triumph for them, which will make them rejoice, and cover me with shame.
Pardon me, doctor, these worldly ideas; were you a priest I should not
dare tell you that, but you are a man, and you know mankind. Doctor,
pray recall your words; you have said nothing, have you?”

“My dear M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, “my first duty is to
humanity. I would have saved Madame de Saint-Méran, if science could
have done it; but she is dead and my duty regards the living. Let us
bury this terrible secret in the deepest recesses of our hearts; I am
willing, if anyone should suspect this, that my silence on the subject
should be imputed to my ignorance. Meanwhile, sir, watch always—watch
carefully, for perhaps the evil may not stop here. And when you have
found the culprit, if you find him, I will say to you, ‘You are a
magistrate, do as you will!’”

“I thank you, doctor,” said Villefort with indescribable joy; “I never
had a better friend than you.” And, as if he feared Doctor d’Avrigny
would recall his promise, he hurried him towards the house.

As he thought thus, he looked alternately at the window with red
curtains and the three windows with white curtains. The light had almost
disappeared from the former; doubtless Madame de Villefort had just put
out her lamp, and the nightlamp alone reflected its dull light on the
window. At the extremity of the building, on the contrary, he saw one of
the three windows open. A wax-light placed on the mantle-piece threw
some of its pale rays without, and a shadow was seen for one moment on
the balcony. Morrel shuddered; he thought he heard a sob.

Meanwhile, Morrel had traversed the anteroom and found the staircase,
which, being carpeted, prevented his approach being heard, and he had
regained that degree of confidence that the presence of M. de Villefort
even would not have alarmed him. He was quite prepared for any such
encounter. He would at once approach Valentine’s father and acknowledge
all, begging Villefort to pardon and sanction the love which united two
fond and loving hearts. Morrel was mad.

“What voices?” asked Valentine. Morrel shuddered as he thought of the
conversation of the doctor and M. de Villefort, and he thought he could
see through the sheet the extended hands, the stiff neck, and the purple
lips.

Valentine looked at the young man; they heard the street door close,
then M. de Villefort locked the garden door, and returned upstairs. He
stopped a moment in the anteroom, as if hesitating whether to turn to
his own apartment or into Madame de Saint-Méran’s; Morrel concealed
himself behind a door; Valentine remained motionless, grief seeming to
deprive her of all fear. M. de Villefort passed on to his own room.

“This was our resolution; a cabriolet was in waiting at the gate, in
which I intended to carry off Valentine to my sister’s house, to marry
her, and to wait respectfully M. de Villefort’s pardon.”

“I will go,” continued Maximilian, “I will seek M. Franz d’Épinay—I am
happy to be able to mention this in Mademoiselle de Villefort’s
absence—and will conduct myself toward him so as to compel him to
challenge me.” Noirtier’s look continued to interrogate.

Chapter 74. The Villefort Family Vault

Two days after, a considerable crowd was assembled, towards ten o’clock
in the morning, around the door of M. de Villefort’s house, and a long
file of mourning-coaches and private carriages extended along the
Faubourg Saint-Honoré and the Rue de la Pépinière. Among them was one of
a very singular form, which appeared to have come from a distance. It
was a kind of covered wagon, painted black, and was one of the first to
arrive. Inquiry was made, and it was ascertained that, by a strange
coincidence, this carriage contained the corpse of the Marquis de Saint-
Méran, and that those who had come thinking to attend one funeral would
follow two. Their number was great. The Marquis de Saint-Méran, one of
the most zealous and faithful dignitaries of Louis XVIII. and King
Charles X., had preserved a great number of friends, and these, added to
the personages whom the usages of society gave Villefort a claim on,
formed a considerable body.

Due information was given to the authorities, and permission obtained
that the two funerals should take place at the same time. A second
hearse, decked with the same funereal pomp, was brought to M. de
Villefort’s door, and the coffin removed into it from the post-wagon.
The two bodies were to be interred in the cemetery of Père-Lachaise,
where M. de Villefort had long since had a tomb prepared for the
reception of his family. The remains of poor Renée were already
deposited there, and now, after ten years of separation, her father and
mother were to be reunited with her.

“At any rate,” said Albert, “whatever disease or doctor may have killed
her, M. de Villefort, or rather, Mademoiselle Valentine,—or, still
rather, our friend Franz, inherits a magnificent fortune, amounting, I
believe, to 80,000 livres per annum.”

“In the first carriage, with M. de Villefort, who considers him already
as one of the family.”

Such was the conversation in almost all the carriages; these two sudden
deaths, so quickly following each other, astonished everyone, but no one
suspected the terrible secret which M. d’Avrigny had communicated, in
his nocturnal walk to M. de Villefort. They arrived in about an hour at
the cemetery; the weather was mild, but dull, and in harmony with the
funeral ceremony. Among the groups which flocked towards the family
vault, Château-Renaud recognized Morrel, who had come alone in a
cabriolet, and walked silently along the path bordered with yew-trees.

“You here?” said Château-Renaud, passing his arms through the young
captain’s; “are you a friend of Villefort’s? How is it that I have never
met you at his house?”

“I am no acquaintance of M. de Villefort’s,” answered Morrel, “but I was
of Madame de Saint-Méran.” Albert came up to them at this moment with
Franz.

“Mademoiselle de Villefort is in deep sorrow, is she not?” said Debray
to Franz.

The Villefort vault formed a square of white stones, about twenty feet
high; an interior partition separated the two families, and each
apartment had its entrance door. Here were not, as in other tombs,
ignoble drawers, one above another, where thrift bestows its dead and
labels them like specimens in a museum; all that was visible within the
bronze gates was a gloomy-looking room, separated by a wall from the
vault itself. The two doors before mentioned were in the middle of this
wall, and enclosed the Villefort and Saint-Méran coffins. There grief
might freely expend itself without being disturbed by the trifling
loungers who came from a picnic party to visit Père-Lachaise, or by
lovers who make it their rendezvous.

The two coffins were placed on trestles previously prepared for their
reception in the right-hand crypt belonging to the Saint-Méran family.
Villefort, Franz, and a few near relatives alone entered the sanctuary.

As the religious ceremonies had all been performed at the door, and
there was no address given, the party all separated; Château-Renaud,
Albert, and Morrel, went one way, and Debray and Beauchamp the other.
Franz remained with M. de Villefort; at the gate of the cemetery Morrel
made an excuse to wait; he saw Franz and M. de Villefort get into the
same mourning-coach, and thought this meeting forboded evil. He then
returned to Paris, and although in the same carriage with Château-Renaud
and Albert, he did not hear one word of their conversation.

As Franz was about to take leave of M. de Villefort, “When shall I see
you again?” said the latter.

Thus, the future father and son-in-law stepped into the same carriage,
and Morrel, seeing them pass, became uneasy. Villefort and Franz
returned to the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. The procureur, without going to
see either his wife or his daughter, went at once to his study, and,
offering the young man a chair:

“Then,” said Villefort, “nothing further is required. The contract was
to have been signed three days since; we shall find it all ready, and
can sign it today.”

“Don’t be uneasy on that score,” replied Villefort; “no ceremony will be
neglected in my house. Mademoiselle de Villefort may retire during the
prescribed three months to her estate of Saint-Méran; I say hers, for
she inherits it today. There, after a few days, if you like, the civil
marriage shall be celebrated without pomp or ceremony. Madame de Saint-
Méran wished her daughter should be married there. When that is over,
you, sir, can return to Paris, while your wife passes the time of her
mourning with her mother-in-law.”

“Then,” replied M. de Villefort, “have the kindness to wait half an
hour; Valentine shall come down into the drawing-room. I will send for
M. Deschamps; we will read and sign the contract before we separate, and
this evening Madame de Villefort shall accompany Valentine to her
estate, where we will rejoin them in a week.”

Franz bowed and left the room. Scarcely had the door closed, when M. de
Villefort sent to tell Valentine to be ready in the drawing-room in half
an hour, as he expected the notary and M. d’Épinay and his witnesses.
The news caused a great sensation throughout the house; Madame de
Villefort would not believe it, and Valentine was thunderstruck. She
looked around for help, and would have gone down to her grandfather’s
room, but on the stairs she met M. de Villefort, who took her arm and
led her into the drawing-room. In the anteroom, Valentine met Barrois,
and looked despairingly at the old servant. A moment later, Madame de
Villefort entered the drawing-room with her little Edward. It was
evident that she had shared the grief of the family, for she was pale
and looked fatigued. She sat down, took Edward on her knees, and from
time to time pressed this child, on whom her affections appeared
centred, almost convulsively to her bosom.

Two carriages were soon heard to enter the courtyard. One was the
notary’s; the other, that of Franz and his friends. In a moment the
whole party was assembled. Valentine was so pale one might trace the
blue veins from her temples, round her eyes and down her cheeks. Franz
was deeply affected. Château-Renaud and Albert looked at each other with
amazement; the ceremony which was just concluded had not appeared more
sorrowful than did that which was about to begin. Madame de Villefort
had placed herself in the shadow behind a velvet curtain, and as she
constantly bent over her child, it was difficult to read the expression
of her face. M. de Villefort was, as usual, unmoved.

“I have, then, to inform you, sir, at the request of M. de Villefort,
that your projected marriage with Mademoiselle de Villefort has changed
the feeling of M. Noirtier towards his grandchild, and that he
disinherits her entirely of the fortune he would have left her. Let me
hasten to add,” continued he, “that the testator, having only the right
to alienate a part of his fortune, and having alienated it all, the will
will not bear scrutiny, and is declared null and void.”

“Yes.” said Villefort; “but I warn M. d’Épinay, that during my life-time
my father’s will shall never be questioned, my position forbidding any
doubt to be entertained.”

“Sir,” said Franz, “I regret much that such a question has been raised
in the presence of Mademoiselle Valentine; I have never inquired the
amount of her fortune, which, however limited it may be, exceeds mine.
My family has sought consideration in this alliance with M. de
Villefort; all I seek is happiness.”

“Besides, sir,” said Villefort, addressing himself to his future son-in-
law, “excepting the loss of a portion of your hopes, this unexpected
will need not personally wound you; M. Noirtier’s weakness of mind
sufficiently explains it. It is not because Mademoiselle Valentine is
going to marry you that he is angry, but because she will marry, a union
with any other would have caused him the same sorrow. Old age is
selfish, sir, and Mademoiselle de Villefort has been a faithful
companion to M. Noirtier, which she cannot be when she becomes the
Baroness d’Épinay. My father’s melancholy state prevents our speaking to
him on any subjects, which the weakness of his mind would incapacitate
him from understanding, and I am perfectly convinced that at the present
time, although, he knows that his granddaughter is going to be married,
M. Noirtier has even forgotten the name of his intended grandson.” M. de
Villefort had scarcely said this, when the door opened, and Barrois
appeared.

“Gentlemen,” said he, in a tone strangely firm for a servant speaking to
his masters under such solemn circumstances,—“gentlemen, M. Noirtier de
Villefort wishes to speak immediately to M. Franz de Quesnel, baron
d’Épinay.” He, as well as the notary, that there might be no mistake in
the person, gave all his titles to the bridegroom elect.

Villefort started, Madame de Villefort let her son slip from her knees,
Valentine rose, pale and dumb as a statue. Albert and Château-Renaud
exchanged a second look, more full of amazement than the first. The
notary looked at Villefort.

“Grandpapa Noirtier can speak now, then,” said Edward, with his habitual
quickness. However, his remark did not make Madame de Villefort even
smile, so much was every mind engaged, and so solemn was the situation.

“Tell M. Nortier,” resumed Villefort, “that what he demands is
impossible.”

Astonishment was at its height. Something like a smile was perceptible
on Madame de Villefort’s countenance. Valentine instinctively raised her
eyes, as if to thank heaven.

“Pray go, Valentine,” said; M. de Villefort, “and see what this new
fancy of your grandfather’s is.” Valentine rose quickly, and was
hastening joyfully towards the door, when M. de Villefort altered his
intention.

“Pray, sir,” said Villefort with marked uneasiness, “do not disturb
yourself.”

And without listening to Villefort he arose, and followed Valentine, who
was running downstairs with the joy of a shipwrecked mariner who finds a
rock to cling to. M. de Villefort followed them. Château-Renaud and
Morcerf exchanged a third look of still increasing wonder.

“Listen,” whispered Villefort to Valentine, who could not conceal her
joy; “if M. Noirtier wishes to communicate anything which would delay
your marriage, I forbid you to understand him.”

Valentine blushed, but did not answer. Villefort, approached Noirtier.

Noirtier answered only by a look which made Villefort’s blood run cold.
He motioned to Valentine to approach. In a moment, thanks to her habit
of conversing with her grandfather, she understood that he asked for a
key. Then his eye was fixed on the drawer of a small chest between the
windows. She opened the drawer, and found a key; and, understanding that
was what he wanted, again watched his eyes, which turned toward an old
secretaire which had been neglected for many years and was supposed to
contain nothing but useless documents.

Valentine went to the door, and called Barrois. Villefort’s impatience
during this scene made the perspiration roll from his forehead, and
Franz was stupefied. The old servant came.

“Shall I give these papers to M. de Villefort?”

“Then let us sit down,” said Villefort impatiently, “for it will take
some time.”

“Sit down,” said the old man. Villefort took a chair, but Valentine
remained standing by her father’s side, and Franz before him, holding
the mysterious paper in his hand. “Read,” said the old man. Franz untied
it, and in the midst of the most profound silence read:

Franz stopped. “February 5th, 1815!” said he; “it is the day my father
was murdered.” Valentine and Villefort were dumb; the eye of the old man
alone seemed to say clearly, “Go on.”

“And hence,” said Villefort, “arose my affection for your father, my
dear M. Franz. Opinions held in common are a ready bond of union.”

“Ah, my father!” said Franz, interrupting himself. “I understand now why
they murdered him.” Valentine could not help casting one glance towards
the young man, whose filial enthusiasm it was delightful to behold.
Villefort walked to and fro behind them. Noirtier watched the expression
of each one, and preserved his dignified and commanding attitude. Franz
returned to the manuscript, and continued:

Franz again interrupted himself, and wiped the cold drops from his brow;
there was something awful in hearing the son read aloud in trembling
pallor these details of his father’s death, which had hitherto been a
mystery. Valentine clasped her hands as if in prayer. Noirtier looked at
Villefort with an almost sublime expression of contempt and pride.

When Franz had finished reading this account, so dreadful for a son;
when Valentine, pale with emotion, had wiped away a tear; when
Villefort, trembling, and crouched in a corner, had endeavored to lessen
the storm by supplicating glances at the implacable old man,—

Villefort mechanically felt for the handle of the door; Valentine, who
understood sooner than anyone her grandfather’s answer, and who had
often seen two scars upon his right arm, drew back a few steps.

“Hold, sir,” said Villefort, “do not prolong this dreadful scene. The
names have been purposely concealed; my father himself does not know who
this president was, and if he knows, he cannot tell you; proper names
are not in the dictionary.”

“Yes!” replied Noirtier, fixing a majestic look on the young man. Franz
fell powerless on a chair; Villefort opened the door and escaped, for
the idea had entered his mind to stifle the little remaining life in the
heart of this terrible old man.

“I have none—nor have I ever possessed any; but really we have talked
long enough of money, count, we are like two stockbrokers; have you
heard how fate is persecuting the poor Villeforts?”

“How extraordinary! And how does M. de Villefort bear it?”

If Valentine could have seen the trembling step and agitated countenance
of Franz when he quitted the chamber of M. Noirtier, even she would have
been constrained to pity him. Villefort had only just given utterance to
a few incoherent sentences, and then retired to his study, where he
received about two hours afterwards the following letter:

“After all the disclosures which were made this morning, M. Noirtier de
Villefort must see the utter impossibility of any alliance being formed
between his family and that of M. Franz d’Épinay. M. d’Épinay must say
that he is shocked and astonished that M. de Villefort, who appeared to
be aware of all the circumstances detailed this morning, should not have
anticipated him in this announcement.”

No one who had seen the magistrate at this moment, so thoroughly
unnerved by the recent inauspicious combination of circumstances, would
have supposed for an instant that he had anticipated the annoyance;
although it certainly never had occurred to him that his father would
carry candor, or rather rudeness, so far as to relate such a history.
And in justice to Villefort, it must be understood that M. Noirtier, who
never cared for the opinion of his son on any subject, had always
omitted to explain the affair to Villefort, so that he had all his life
entertained the belief that General de Quesnel, or the Baron d’Épinay,
as he was alternately styled, according as the speaker wished to
identify him by his own family name, or by the title which had been
conferred on him, fell the victim of assassination, and not that he was
killed fairly in a duel. This harsh letter, coming as it did from a man
generally so polite and respectful, struck a mortal blow at the pride of
Villefort.

Hardly had he read the letter, when his wife entered. The sudden
departure of Franz, after being summoned by M. Noirtier, had so much
astonished everyone, that the position of Madame de Villefort, left
alone with the notary and the witnesses, became every moment more
embarrassing. Determined to bear it no longer, she arose and left the
room; saying she would go and make some inquiries into the cause of his
sudden disappearance.

M. de Villefort’s communications on the subject were very limited and
concise; he told her, in fact, that an explanation had taken place
between M. Noirtier, M. d’Épinay, and himself, and that the marriage of
Valentine and Franz would consequently be broken off. This was an
awkward and unpleasant thing to have to report to those who were
waiting. She therefore contented herself with saying that M. Noirtier
having at the commencement of the discussion been attacked by a sort of
apoplectic fit, the affair would necessarily be deferred for some days
longer. This news, false as it was following so singularly in the train
of the two similar misfortunes which had so recently occurred, evidently
astonished the auditors, and they retired without a word.

It was high time for her to make her appearance at the gate, for
Maximilian had long awaited her coming. He had half guessed what was
going on when he saw Franz quit the cemetery with M. de Villefort. He
followed M. d’Épinay, saw him enter, afterwards go out, and then re-
enter with Albert and Château-Renaud. He had no longer any doubts as to
the nature of the conference; he therefore quickly went to the gate in
the clover-patch, prepared to hear the result of the proceedings, and
very certain that Valentine would hasten to him the first moment she
should be set at liberty. He was not mistaken; peering through the
crevices of the wooden partition, he soon discovered the young girl, who
cast aside all her usual precautions and walked at once to the barrier.
The first glance which Maximilian directed towards her entirely
reassured him, and the first words she spoke made his heart bound with
delight.

During the time occupied by the interview we have just detailed, Madame
de Villefort had gone to visit M. Noirtier. The old man looked at her
with that stern and forbidding expression with which he was accustomed
to receive her.

“Now that this marriage, which I know you so much disliked, is done away
with, I come to you on an errand which neither M. de Villefort nor
Valentine could consistently undertake.”

“I come to entreat you, sir,” continued Madame de Villefort, “as the
only one who has the right of doing so, inasmuch as I am the only one
who will receive no personal benefit from the transaction,—I come to
entreat you to restore, not your love, for that she has always
possessed, but to restore your fortune to your granddaughter.”

“May I hope, sir,” said Madame de Villefort, “that your intentions
accord with my request?”

“In that case, sir,” rejoined Madame de Villefort, “I will leave you
overwhelmed with gratitude and happiness at your prompt acquiescence to
my wishes.” She then bowed to M. Noirtier and retired.

The next day M. Noirtier sent for the notary; the first will was torn up
and a second made, in which he left the whole of his fortune to
Valentine, on condition that she should never be separated from him. It
was then generally reported that Mademoiselle de Villefort, the heiress
of the marquis and marchioness of Saint-Méran, had regained the good
graces of her grandfather, and that she would ultimately be in
possession of an income of 300,000 livres.

While all the proceedings relative to the dissolution of the marriage-
contract were being carried on at the house of M. de Villefort, Monte
Cristo had paid his visit to the Count of Morcerf, who, in order to lose
no time in responding to M. Danglars’ wishes, and at the same time to
pay all due deference to his position in society, donned his uniform of
lieutenant-general, which he ornamented with all his crosses, and thus
attired, ordered his finest horses and drove to the Rue de la Chaussée
d’Antin.

“But you, Mademoiselle de Villefort,—you, who are necessary to M.
Noirtier’s happiness——”

“I?” interrupted Valentine; “I shall not leave my grandfather,—that is
an understood thing between us. My apartment will be close to his. Now,
M. de Villefort must either give his consent to this plan or his
refusal; in the first case, I shall leave directly, and in the second, I
shall wait till I am of age, which will be in about ten months. Then I
shall be free, I shall have an independent fortune, and”—

At this moment M. de Villefort, attracted by the noise, appeared on the
threshold. Morrel relaxed his hold of Valentine, and retreating to a
distant corner of the room remained half hidden behind a curtain. Pale
as if he had been gazing on a serpent, he fixed his terrified eye on the
agonized sufferer.

Villefort seemed stupefied with astonishment, and remained gazing
intently on the scene before him without uttering a word. He had not
seen Morrel. After a moment of dumb contemplation, during which his face
became pale and his hair seemed to stand on end, he sprang towards the
door, crying out:

“What is the matter?” said Madame de Villefort in a harsh and
constrained tone.

“But where is the doctor?” exclaimed Villefort; “where is he?”

Madame de Villefort now deliberately descended the staircase. In one
hand she held her handkerchief, with which she appeared to be wiping her
face, and in the other a bottle of English smelling-salts. Her first
look on entering the room was at Noirtier, whose face, independent of
the emotion which such a scene could not fail of producing, proclaimed
him to be in possession of his usual health; her second glance was at
the dying man. She turned pale, and her eye passed quickly from the
servant and rested on the master.

“In the name of heaven, madame,” said Villefort, “where is the doctor?
He was with you just now. You see this is a fit of apoplexy, and he
might be saved if he could but be bled!”

“Has he eaten anything lately?” asked Madame de Villefort, eluding her
husband’s question.

“Ah,” said Madame de Villefort, “why did he not take wine? Lemonade was
a very bad thing for him.”

Madame de Villefort started. Noirtier looked at her with a glance of the
most profound scrutiny.

“Madame,” said Villefort, “I ask where is M. d’Avrigny? In God’s name
answer me!”

“He is with Edward, who is not quite well,” replied Madame de Villefort,
no longer being able to avoid answering.

Villefort rushed upstairs to fetch him.

“Take this,” said Madame de Villefort, giving her smelling-bottle to
Valentine. “They will, no doubt, bleed him; therefore I will retire, for
I cannot endure the sight of blood;” and she followed her husband
upstairs. Morrel now emerged from his hiding-place, where he had
remained quite unperceived, so great had been the general confusion.

At the same moment that he quitted the room, Villefort and the doctor
entered by an opposite door. Barrois was now showing signs of returning
consciousness. The risis seemed past, a low moaning was heard, and he
raised himself on one knee. D’Avrigny and Villefort laid him on a couch.

“What do you prescribe, doctor?” demanded Villefort.

Villefort immediately despatched a messenger. “And now let everyone
retire.”

“Look, look, doctor,” said Villefort, “he is quite coming round again; I
really do not think, after all, it is anything of consequence.”

“Shall I go and fetch it, doctor?” inquired Villefort.

D’Avrigny bounded towards the door, flew down the back staircase, and
almost knocked down Madame de Villefort, in his haste, who was herself
going down to the kitchen. She cried out, but d’Avrigny paid no
attention to her; possessed with but one idea, he cleared the last four
steps with a bound, and rushed into the kitchen, where he saw the
decanter about three parts empty still standing on the waiter, where it
had been left. He darted upon it as an eagle would seize upon its prey.
Panting with loss of breath, he returned to the room he had just left.
Madame de Villefort was slowly ascending the steps which led to her
room.

“That emetic, Villefort—see if it is coming.”

Villefort sprang into the passage, exclaiming, “The emetic! the
emetic!—is it come yet?” No one answered. The most profound terror
reigned throughout the house.

“Was it M. de Villefort?”

“Here is a glass with one already prepared,” said Villefort, entering
the room.

“Well?” said Villefort.

Villefort went immediately.

Villefort returned, and d’Avrigny met him in the passage.

Villefort drew back a few steps, and, clasping his hands, exclaimed,
with real amazement and sympathy, “Dead?—and so soon too!”

“Yes, it is very soon,” said the doctor, looking at the corpse before
him; “but that ought not to astonish you; Monsieur and Madame de Saint-
Méran died as soon. People die very suddenly in your house, M. de
Villefort.”

“Still, sir; and I shall always do so,” replied d’Avrigny, “for it has
never for one instant ceased to retain possession of my mind; and that
you may be quite sure I am not mistaken this time, listen well to what I
am going to say, M. de Villefort.”

Villefort said nothing, but he clasped his hands, opened his haggard
eyes, and, overcome with his emotion, sank into a chair.

“Oh, death is in my house!” cried Villefort.

“M. d’Avrigny,” cried Villefort, “I cannot tell you all I feel at this
moment,—terror, grief, madness.”

Villefort cast a gloomy look around him. “In my house,” murmured he, “in
my house!”

Villefort shrieked, clasped his hands, and looked at the doctor with a
supplicating air. But the latter went on without pity:

“Doctor,” cried Villefort, “alas, doctor, how often has man’s justice
been deceived by those fatal words. I know not why, but I feel that this
crime——”

“Oh, have pity—have pity!” murmured Villefort, wringing his hands.

“I would swear to it; what I heard of his symptoms agrees too well with
what I have seen in the other cases.” Villefort ceased to contend; he
only groaned. “He first kills M. de Saint-Méran,” repeated the doctor,
“then Madame de Saint-Méran,—a double fortune to inherit.” Villefort
wiped the perspiration from his forehead. “Listen attentively.”

“Alas,” stammered Villefort, “I do not lose a single word.”

“Have mercy on my child, sir,” murmured Villefort.

“No pity, procureur; the crime is fragrant. Mademoiselle herself packed
all the medicines which were sent to M. de Saint-Méran; and M. de Saint-
Méran is dead. Mademoiselle de Villefort prepared all the cooling
draughts which Madame de Saint-Méran took, and Madame de Saint-Méran is
dead. Mademoiselle de Villefort took from the hands of Barrois, who was
sent out, the lemonade which M. Noirtier had every morning, and he has
escaped by a miracle. Mademoiselle de Villefort is the culprit—she is
the poisoner! To you, as the king’s attorney, I denounce Mademoiselle de
Villefort, do your duty.”

“M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, with increased vehemence, “there
are occasions when I dispense with all foolish human circumspection. If
your daughter had committed only one crime, and I saw her meditating
another, I would say ‘Warn her, punish her, let her pass the remainder
of her life in a convent, weeping and praying.’ If she had committed two
crimes, I would say, ‘Here, M. de Villefort, is a poison that the
prisoner is not acquainted with,—one that has no known antidote, quick
as thought, rapid as lightning, mortal as the thunderbolt; give her that
poison, recommending her soul to God, and save your honor and your life,
for it is yours she aims at; and I can picture her approaching your
pillow with her hypocritical smiles and her sweet exhortations. Woe to
you, M. de Villefort, if you do not strike first!’ This is what I would
say had she only killed two persons but she has seen three deaths,—has
contemplated three murdered persons,—has knelt by three corpses! To the
scaffold with the poisoner—to the scaffold! Do you talk of your honor?
Do what I tell you, and immortality awaits you!”

Villefort fell on his knees.

Villefort, suffocating, pressed the doctor’s arm.

Villefort looked at him as if he had doubted his words.

The doctor went out first, followed by M. de Villefort. The terrified
servants were on the stairs and in the passage where the doctor would
pass.

“Sir,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, so loud that all might hear, “poor
Barrois has led too sedentary a life of late; accustomed formerly to
ride on horseback, or in the carriage, to the four corners of Europe,
the monotonous walk around that armchair has killed him—his blood has
thickened. He was stout, had a short, thick neck; he was attacked with
apoplexy, and I was called in too late. By the way,” added he in a low
tone, “take care to throw away that cup of syrup of violets in the
ashes.”

The doctor, without shaking hands with Villefort, without adding a word
to what he had said, went out, amid the tears and lamentations of the
whole household. The same evening all Villefort’s servants, who had
assembled in the kitchen, and had a long consultation, came to tell
Madame de Villefort that they wished to leave. No entreaty, no
proposition of increased wages, could induce them to remain; to every
argument they replied, “We must go, for death is in this house.”

Villefort looked at Valentine as they said this. She was in tears, and,
strange as it was, in spite of the emotions he felt at the sight of
these tears, he looked also at Madame de Villefort, and it appeared to
him as if a slight gloomy smile had passed over her thin lips, like a
meteor seen passing inauspiciously between two clouds in a stormy sky.

“My God!” he exclaimed, “thy vengeance is sometimes delayed, but only
that it may fall the more effectually.” Ali looked at his master for
further instructions. “Bring here immediately the king’s attorney, M. de
Villefort, who lives in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. As you pass the
lodge, wake the porter, and send him for a surgeon.”

Villefort, being called on to prove the crime, was preparing his brief
with the same ardor that he was accustomed to exercise when required to
speak in criminal cases.

“The one M. de Villefort is preparing against my amiable assassin—some
brigand escaped from the gallows apparently.”

“Some Provençal, it appears. M. de Villefort heard of him at Marseilles,
and M. Danglars recollects having seen him. Consequently, the procureur
is very active in the affair, and the prefect of police very much
interested; and, thanks to that interest, for which I am very grateful,
they send me all the robbers of Paris and the neighborhood, under
pretence of their being Caderousse’s murderers, so that in three months,
if this continues, every robber and assassin in France will have the
plan of my house at his fingers’ ends. I am resolved to desert them and
go to some remote corner of the earth, and shall be happy if you will
accompany me, viscount.”

“I do this, Oh, my God,” said he, with his eyes raised to heaven, “as
much for thy honor as for mine. I have during ten years considered
myself the agent of thy vengeance, and other wretches, like Morcerf,
Danglars, Villefort, even Morcerf himself, must not imagine that chance
has freed them from their enemy. Let them know, on the contrary, that
their punishment, which had been decreed by Providence, is only delayed
by my present determination, and although they escape it in this world,
it awaits them in another, and that they are only exchanging time for
eternity.”

We may easily conceive where Morrel’s appointment was. On leaving Monte
Cristo he walked slowly towards Villefort’s; we say slowly, for Morrel
had more than half an hour to spare to go five hundred steps, but he had
hastened to take leave of Monte Cristo because he wished to be alone
with his thoughts. He knew his time well—the hour when Valentine was
giving Noirtier his breakfast, and was sure not to be disturbed in the
performance of this pious duty. Noirtier and Valentine had given him
leave to go twice a week, and he was now availing himself of that
permission.

He arrived; Valentine was expecting him. Uneasy and almost crazed, she
seized his hand and led him to her grandfather. This uneasiness,
amounting almost to frenzy, arose from the report Morcerf’s adventure
had made in the world, for the affair at the Opera was generally known.
No one at Villefort’s doubted that a duel would ensue from it.
Valentine, with her woman’s instinct, guessed that Morrel would be Monte
Cristo’s second, and from the young man’s well-known courage and his
great affection for the count, she feared that he would not content
himself with the passive part assigned to him. We may easily understand
how eagerly the particulars were asked for, given, and received; and
Morrel could read an indescribable joy in the eyes of his beloved, when
she knew that the termination of this affair was as happy as it was
unexpected.

“Now,” said Valentine, motioning to Morrel to sit down near her
grandfather, while she took her seat on his footstool,—“now let us talk
about our own affairs. You know, Maximilian, grandpapa once thought of
leaving this house, and taking an apartment away from M. de
Villefort’s.”

Morrel watched her as she left the room; he heard her ascend the little
staircase which led both to Madame de Villefort’s apartments and to
hers. As soon as she was gone, Noirtier made a sign to Morrel to take
the dictionary. Morrel obeyed; guided by Valentine, he had learned how
to understand the old man quickly. Accustomed, however, as he was to the
work, he had to repeat most of the letters of the alphabet and to find
every word in the dictionary, so that it was ten minutes before the
thought of the old man was translated by these words,

“Ask her,” said Morrel, translating Noirtier’s thought this time by his
look. The servant went out, but returned almost immediately.
“Mademoiselle Valentine passed through the room to go to Madame de
Villefort’s,” said he; “and in passing, as she was thirsty, she drank
what remained in the glass; as for the decanter, Master Edward had
emptied that to make a pond for his ducks.”

It was indeed Madame Danglars and her daughter whom Valentine had seen;
they had been ushered into Madame de Villefort’s room, who had said she
would receive them there. That is why Valentine passed through her room,
which was on a level with Valentine’s, and only separated from it by
Edward’s. The two ladies entered the drawing-room with that sort of
official stiffness which preludes a formal communication. Among worldly
people manner is contagious. Madame de Villefort received them with
equal solemnity. Valentine entered at this moment, and the formalities
were resumed.

“Allow me to present you my sincere congratulations,” replied Madame de
Villefort. “Prince Cavalcanti appears to be a young man of rare
qualities.”

“And then,” said Eugénie, while turning over the leaves of Madame de
Villefort’s album, “add that you have taken a great fancy to the young
man.”

“And,” said Madame de Villefort, “I need not ask you if you share that
fancy.”

“Impossible,” said Madame de Villefort.

“Oh, do not be alarmed; I have been so for many days.” Artless as she
was, the young girl knew that this was an opportunity to leave, and
besides, Madame de Villefort came to her assistance.

“That poor child,” said Madame de Villefort when Valentine was gone,
“she makes me very uneasy, and I should not be astonished if she had
some serious illness.”

“But no,” said Valentine,—“no, I tell you it is all past, and it was
nothing. Now, let me tell you some news; Eugénie is to be married in a
week, and in three days there is to be a grand feast, a betrothal
festival. We are all invited, my father, Madame de Villefort, and I—at
least, I understood it so.”

“I told you so!” exclaimed Madame de Villefort. “Poor child!”

At the same moment M. de Villefort’s voice was heard calling from his
study, “What is the matter?”

Villefort sprang into the room, ran to Valentine, and took her in his
arms.

“A physician, a physician,—M. d’Avrigny!” cried Villefort; “or rather I
will go for him myself.”

He flew from the apartment, and Morrel at the same moment darted out at
the other door. He had been struck to the heart by a frightful
recollection—the conversation he had heard between the doctor and
Villefort the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death, recurred to him;
these symptoms, to a less alarming extent, were the same which had
preceded the death of Barrois. At the same time Monte Cristo’s voice
seemed to resound in his ear with the words he had heard only two hours
before, “Whatever you want, Morrel, come to me; I have great power.”

Meanwhile M. de Villefort arrived in a hired cabriolet at M. d’Avrigny’s
door. He rang so violently that the porter was alarmed. Villefort ran
upstairs without saying a word. The porter knew him, and let him pass,
only calling to him:

“In his study, Monsieur Procureur—in his study!” Villefort pushed, or
rather forced, the door open.

“Yes,” said Villefort, closing the door after him, “it is I, who am come
in my turn to ask you if we are quite alone. Doctor, my house is
accursed!”

“Yes, doctor,” cried Villefort, clutching his hair, “yes!”

A mournful sob burst from Villefort’s heart; he approached the doctor,
and seizing his arm,—“Valentine,” said he, “it is Valentine’s turn!”

The same cabriolet which had brought Villefort took them back at full
speed, and at this moment Morrel rapped at Monte Cristo’s door.

“Perfectly well, my good friend; and I will prove it to you by putting
the dots to the i, or rather by naming the persons. You were walking one
evening in M. de Villefort’s garden; from what you relate, I suppose it
to have been the evening of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death. You heard M.
de Villefort talking to M. d’Avrigny about the death of M. de Saint-
Méran, and that no less surprising, of the countess. M. d’Avrigny said
he believed they both proceeded from poison; and you, honest man, have
ever since been asking your heart and sounding your conscience to know
if you ought to expose or conceal this secret. We are no longer in the
Middle Ages; there is no longer a Vehmgericht, or Free Tribunals; what
do you want to ask these people? ‘Conscience, what hast thou to do with
me?’ as Sterne said. My dear fellow, let them sleep on, if they are
asleep; let them grow pale in their drowsiness, if they are disposed to
do so, and pray do you remain in peace, who have no remorse to disturb
you.”

“I love most fondly—I love madly—I love as a man who would give his
life-blood to spare her a tear—I love Valentine de Villefort, who is
being murdered at this moment! Do you understand me? I love her; and I
ask God and you how I can save her?”

Meanwhile, Villefort and d’Avrigny had made all possible haste,
Valentine had not revived from her fainting fit on their arrival, and
the doctor examined the invalid with all the care the circumstances
demanded, and with an interest which the knowledge of the secret
intensified twofold. Villefort, closely watching his countenance and his
lips, awaited the result of the examination. Noirtier, paler than even
the young girl, more eager than Villefort for the decision, was watching
also intently and affectionately.

“Still?” cried Villefort; “oh, doctor, what a dreadful word is that.”

“Sir,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, “call Mademoiselle Valentine’s maid,
if you please.”

Villefort went himself to find her; and d’Avrigny approached Noirtier.

“Well, I will remain with you.” At this moment Villefort returned,
followed by the lady’s maid; and after her came Madame de Villefort.

“Ah,” said he, involuntarily following Noirtier’s eyes, which were fixed
on Madame de Villefort, who repeated:

They carried Valentine away; she had revived, but could scarcely move or
speak, so shaken was her frame by the attack. She had, however, just
power to give one parting look to her grandfather, who in losing her
seemed to be resigning his very soul. D’Avrigny followed the invalid,
wrote a prescription, ordered Villefort to take a cabriolet, go in
person to a chemist’s to get the prescribed medicine, bring it himself,
and wait for him in his daughter’s room. Then, having renewed his
injunction not to give Valentine anything, he went down again to
Noirtier, shut the doors carefully, and after convincing himself that no
one was listening:

A superhuman joy expanded the old man’s eyes, which were raised towards
heaven with an expression of infinite gratitude. At this moment
Villefort returned.

“Well,” said he, “let us go to Valentine; I will give instructions to
everyone, and you, M. de Villefort, will yourself see that no one
deviates from them.”

At the moment when d’Avrigny was returning to Valentine’s room,
accompanied by Villefort, an Italian priest, of serious demeanor and
calm and firm tone, hired for his use the house adjoining the hotel of
M. de Villefort. No one knew how the three former tenants of that house
left it. About two hours afterwards its foundation was reported to be
unsafe; but the report did not prevent the new occupant establishing
himself there with his modest furniture the same day at five o’clock.
The lease was drawn up for three, six, or nine years by the new tenant,
who, according to the rule of the proprietor, paid six months in
advance.

We saw in a preceding chapter how Madame Danglars went formally to
announce to Madame de Villefort the approaching marriage of Eugénie
Danglars and M. Andrea Cavalcanti. This formal announcement, which
implied or appeared to imply, the approval of all the persons concerned
in this momentous affair, had been preceded by a scene to which our
readers must be admitted. We beg them to take one step backward, and to
transport themselves, the morning of that day of great catastrophes,
into the showy, gilded salon we have before shown them, and which was
the pride of its owner, Baron Danglars.

Danglars motioned that he had nothing more to say. Five minutes
afterwards the piano resounded to the touch of Mademoiselle d’Armilly’s
fingers, and Mademoiselle Danglars was singing Brabantio’s malediction
on Desdemona. At the end of the piece Étienne entered, and announced to
Eugénie that the horses were to the carriage, and that the baroness was
waiting for her to pay her visits. We have seen them at Villefort’s;
they proceeded then on their course.

A circle was immediately formed around the door. The count perceived at
one glance Madame Danglars at one end of the drawing-room, M. Danglars
at the other, and Eugénie in front of him. He first advanced towards the
baroness, who was chatting with Madame de Villefort, who had come alone,
Valentine being still an invalid; and without turning aside, so clear
was the road left for him, he passed from the baroness to Eugénie, whom
he complimented in such rapid and measured terms, that the proud artist
was quite struck. Near her was Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, who
thanked the count for the letters of introduction he had so kindly given
her for Italy, which she intended immediately to make use of. On leaving
these ladies he found himself with Danglars, who had advanced to meet
him.

The baron took the pen and signed, then the representative. The baroness
approached, leaning on Madame de Villefort’s arm.

“My dear,” said she, as she took the pen, “is it not vexatious? An
unexpected incident, in the affair of murder and theft at the Count of
Monte Cristo’s, in which he nearly fell a victim, deprives us of the
pleasure of seeing M. de Villefort.”

“But,” asked Madame Danglars, looking at her husband with uneasiness,
“how could that prevent M. de Villefort——”

The baroness then thought of M. de Villefort. It was M. de Villefort who
had remorselessly brought misfortune into her family, as though they had
been strangers. But, no; on reflection, the procureur was not a
merciless man; and it was not the magistrate, slave to his duties, but
the friend, the loyal friend, who roughly but firmly cut into the very
core of the corruption; it was not the executioner, but the surgeon, who
wished to withdraw the honor of Danglars from ignominious association
with the disgraced young man they had presented to the world as their
son-in-law. And since Villefort, the friend of Danglars, had acted in
this way, no one could suppose that he had been previously acquainted
with, or had lent himself to, any of Andrea’s intrigues. Villefort’s
conduct, therefore, upon reflection, appeared to the baroness as if
shaped for their mutual advantage. But the inflexibility of the
procureur should stop there; she would see him the next day, and if she
could not make him fail in his duties as a magistrate, she would, at
least, obtain all the indulgence he could allow. She would invoke the
past, recall old recollections; she would supplicate him by the
remembrance of guilty, yet happy days. M. de Villefort would stifle the
affair; he had only to turn his eyes on one side, and allow Andrea to
fly, and follow up the crime under that shadow of guilt called contempt
of court. And after this reasoning she slept easily.

At nine o’clock next morning she arose, and without ringing for her maid
or giving the least sign of her activity, she dressed herself in the
same simple style as on the previous night; then running downstairs, she
left the hotel, walked to the Rue de Provence, called a cab, and drove
to M. de Villefort’s house.

“Oh, how extraordinary! I shall complain to M. de Villefort of the
impertinence of his servants.”

“You will excuse this poor fellow, madame,” he said, as he preceded the
baroness, “but his orders are precise, and M. de Villefort begged me to
tell you that he could not act otherwise.”

Preoccupied as Madame Danglars had been with the object of her visit,
the treatment she had received from these underlings appeared to her so
insulting, that she began by complaining of it. But Villefort, raising
his head, bowed down by grief, looked up at her with so sad a smile that
her complaints died upon her lips.

“Everything will be forgotten, madame,” said Villefort. “Your daughter
will be married tomorrow, if not today—in a week, if not tomorrow; and I
do not think you can regret the intended husband of your daughter.”

Madame Danglars gazed on Villefort, stupefied to find him so almost
insultingly calm. “Am I come to a friend?” she asked in a tone full of
mournful dignity.

“You know that you are, madame,” said Villefort, whose pale cheeks
became slightly flushed as he gave her the assurance. And truly this
assurance carried him back to different events from those now occupying
the baroness and him.

“Well, then, be more affectionate, my dear Villefort,” said the
baroness. “Speak to me not as a magistrate, but as a friend; and when I
am in bitter anguish of spirit, do not tell me that I ought to be gay.”
Villefort bowed.

“Impostor,” repeated Villefort; “certainly, madame, you appear to
extenuate some cases, and exaggerate others. Impostor, indeed!—M. Andrea
Cavalcanti, or rather M. Benedetto, is nothing more nor less than an
assassin!”

“For all, even for myself among the rest,” replied Villefort.

“Ah!” exclaimed the baroness, without expressing the ideas which the
exclamation betrayed. Villefort looked at her with that piercing glance
which reads the secrets of the heart.

Villefort drew his armchair nearer to Madame Danglars; then resting both
hands upon his desk he said in a voice more hollow than usual:

“There are crimes which remain unpunished because the criminals are
unknown, and we might strike the innocent instead of the guilty; but
when the culprits are discovered” (Villefort here extended his hand
toward a large crucifix placed opposite to his desk)—“when they are
discovered, I swear to you, by all I hold most sacred, that whoever they
may be they shall die. Now, after the oath I have just taken, and which
I will keep, madame, dare you ask for mercy for that wretch!”

“Villefort,” she exclaimed in her softest and most captivating manner.

“For Heaven’s sake, madame,” said Villefort, with a firmness of
expression not altogether free from harshness—“for Heaven’s sake, do not
ask pardon of me for a guilty wretch! What am I?—the law. Has the law
any eyes to witness your grief? Has the law ears to be melted by your
sweet voice? Has the law a memory for all those soft recollections you
endeavor to recall? No, madame; the law has commanded, and when it
commands it strikes. You will tell me that I am a living being, and not
a code—a man, and not a volume. Look at me, madame—look around me. Has
mankind treated me as a brother? Have men loved me? Have they spared me?
Has anyone shown the mercy towards me that you now ask at my hands? No,
madame, they struck me, always struck me!

Villefort pronounced these last words with a feverish rage, which gave a
ferocious eloquence to his words.

“Be it so!” said Villefort, raising his arms to heaven with a
threatening gesture.

“No, madame,” said Villefort; “instructions have been given. There are
yet five days left; five days are more than I require. Do you not think
that I also long for forgetfulness? While working night and day, I
sometimes lose all recollection of the past, and then I experience the
same sort of happiness I can imagine the dead feel; still, it is better
than suffering.”

Villefort seized the letter, and hastily broke the seal. Madame Danglars
trembled with fear; Villefort started with joy.

As the procureur had told Madame Danglars, Valentine was not yet
recovered. Bowed down with fatigue, she was indeed confined to her bed;
and it was in her own room, and from the lips of Madame de Villefort,
that she heard all the strange events we have related; we mean the
flight of Eugénie and the arrest of Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather
Benedetto, together with the accusation of murder pronounced against
him. But Valentine was so weak that this recital scarcely produced the
same effect it would have done had she been in her usual state of
health. Indeed, her brain was only the seat of vague ideas, and confused
forms, mingled with strange fancies, alone presented themselves before
her eyes.

During the daytime Valentine’s perceptions remained tolerably clear,
owing to the constant presence of M. Noirtier, who caused himself to be
carried to his granddaughter’s room, and watched her with his paternal
tenderness; Villefort also, on his return from the law courts,
frequently passed an hour or two with his father and child.

At six o’clock Villefort retired to his study, at eight M. d’Avrigny
himself arrived, bringing the night draught prepared for the young girl,
and then M. Noirtier was carried away. A nurse of the doctor’s choice
succeeded them, and never left till about ten or eleven o’clock, when
Valentine was asleep. As she went downstairs she gave the keys of
Valentine’s room to M. de Villefort, so that no one could reach the
sick-room excepting through that of Madame de Villefort and little
Edward.

On the evening of the day on which Valentine had learned of the flight
of Eugénie and the arrest of Benedetto,—Villefort having retired as well
as Noirtier and d’Avrigny,—her thoughts wandered in a confused maze,
alternately reviewing her own situation and the events she had just
heard.

Still silent: Valentine had promised not to wake. Then everything was
still, excepting that Valentine heard the almost noiseless sound of some
liquid being poured into the glass she had just emptied. Then she
ventured to open her eyelids, and glance over her extended arm. She saw
a woman in a white dressing-gown pouring a liquor from a phial into her
glass. During this short time Valentine must have held her breath, or
moved in some slight degree, for the woman, disturbed, stopped and
leaned over the bed, in order the better to ascertain whether Valentine
slept: it was Madame de Villefort.

On recognizing her step-mother, Valentine could not repress a shudder,
which caused a vibration in the bed. Madame de Villefort instantly
stepped back close to the wall, and there, shaded by the bed-curtains,
she silently and attentively watched the slightest movement of
Valentine. The latter recollected the terrible caution of Monte Cristo;
she fancied that the hand not holding the phial clasped a long sharp
knife. Then collecting all her remaining strength, she forced herself to
close her eyes; but this simple operation upon the most delicate organs
of our frame, generally so easy to accomplish, became almost impossible
at this moment, so much did curiosity struggle to retain the eyelid open
and learn the truth. Madame de Villefort, however, reassured by the
silence, which was alone disturbed by the regular breathing of
Valentine, again extended her hand, and half hidden by the curtains
succeeded in emptying the contents of the phial into the glass. Then she
retired so gently that Valentine did not know she had left the room. She
only witnessed the withdrawal of the arm—the fair round arm of a woman
but twenty-five years old, and who yet spread death around her.

It is impossible to describe the sensations experienced by Valentine
during the minute and a half Madame de Villefort remained in the room.

“Yes, but not against a strong dose; the poison will be changed, and the
quantity increased.” He took the glass and raised it to his lips. “It is
already done,” he said; “brucine is no longer employed, but a simple
narcotic! I can recognize the flavor of the alcohol in which it has been
dissolved. If you had taken what Madame de Villefort has poured into
your glass, Valentine—Valentine—you would have been doomed!”

It was then that the door of Edward’s room opened, and a head we have
before noticed appeared in the glass opposite; it was Madame de
Villefort, who came to witness the effects of the drink she had
prepared. She stopped in the doorway, listened for a moment to the
flickering of the lamp, the only sound in that deserted room, and then
advanced to the table to see if Valentine’s glass were empty. It was
still about a quarter full, as we before stated. Madame de Villefort
emptied the contents into the ashes, which she disturbed that they might
the more readily absorb the liquid; then she carefully rinsed the glass,
and wiping it with her handkerchief replaced it on the table.

If anyone could have looked into the room just then he would have
noticed the hesitation with which Madame de Villefort approached the bed
and looked fixedly on Valentine. The dim light, the profound silence,
and the gloomy thoughts inspired by the hour, and still more by her own
conscience, all combined to produce a sensation of fear; the poisoner
was terrified at the contemplation of her own work.

At length she rallied, drew aside the curtain, and leaning over the
pillow gazed intently on Valentine. The young girl no longer breathed,
no breath issued through the half-closed teeth; the white lips no longer
quivered—the eyes were suffused with a bluish vapor, and the long black
lashes rested on a cheek white as wax. Madame de Villefort gazed upon
the face so expressive even in its stillness; then she ventured to raise
the coverlet and press her hand upon the young girl’s heart. It was cold
and motionless. She only felt the pulsation in her own fingers, and
withdrew her hand with a shudder. One arm was hanging out of the bed;
from shoulder to elbow it was moulded after the arms of Germain Pillon’s
“Graces,”23 but the fore-arm seemed to be slightly distorted by
convulsion, and the hand, so delicately formed, was resting with stiff
outstretched fingers on the framework of the bed. The nails, too, were
turning blue.

Madame de Villefort had no longer any doubt; all was over—she had
consummated the last terrible work she had to accomplish. There was no
more to do in the room, so the poisoner retired stealthily, as though
fearing to hear the sound of her own footsteps; but as she withdrew she
still held aside the curtain, absorbed in the irresistible attraction
always exerted by the picture of death, so long as it is merely
mysterious and does not excite disgust.

The minutes passed; Madame de Villefort could not drop the curtain which
she held like a funeral pall over the head of Valentine. She was lost in
reverie, and the reverie of crime is remorse.

Just then the lamp again flickered; the noise startled Madame de
Villefort, who shuddered and dropped the curtain. Immediately afterwards
the light expired, and the room was plunged in frightful obscurity,
while the clock at that minute struck half-past four.

“What is it?” asked Villefort, rushing from his room. “Doctor, do you
hear them call for help?”

“Call Madame de Villefort!—Wake Madame de Villefort!” cried the
procureur from the door of his chamber, which apparently he scarcely
dared to leave. But instead of obeying him, the servants stood watching
M. d’Avrigny, who ran to Valentine, and raised her in his arms.

Villefort rushed into the room.

M. de Villefort staggered and buried his head in the bed. On the
exclamation of the doctor and the cry of the father, the servants all
fled with muttered imprecations; they were heard running down the stairs
and through the long passages, then there was a rush in the court,
afterwards all was still; they had, one and all, deserted the accursed
house.

Just then, Madame de Villefort, in the act of slipping on her dressing-
gown, threw aside the drapery and for a moment stood motionless, as
though interrogating the occupants of the room, while she endeavored to
call up some rebellious tears. On a sudden she stepped, or rather
bounded, with outstretched arms, towards the table. She saw d’Avrigny
curiously examining the glass, which she felt certain of having emptied
during the night. It was now a third full, just as it was when she threw
the contents into the ashes. The spectre of Valentine rising before the
poisoner would have alarmed her less. It was, indeed, the same color as
the draught she had poured into the glass, and which Valentine had
drunk; it was indeed the poison, which could not deceive M. d’Avrigny,
which he now examined so closely; it was doubtless a miracle from
heaven, that, notwithstanding her precautions, there should be some
trace, some proof remaining to reveal the crime.

While Madame de Villefort remained rooted to the spot like a statue of
terror, and Villefort, with his head hidden in the bedclothes, saw
nothing around him, d’Avrigny approached the window, that he might the
better examine the contents of the glass, and dipping the tip of his
finger in, tasted it.

Madame de Villefort was overpowered; her eyes first flashed and then
swam, she staggered towards the door and disappeared. Directly
afterwards the distant sound of a heavy weight falling on the ground was
heard, but no one paid any attention to it; the nurse was engaged in
watching the chemical analysis, and Villefort was still absorbed in
grief. M. d’Avrigny alone had followed Madame de Villefort with his
eyes, and watched her hurried retreat. He lifted up the drapery over the
entrance to Edward’s room, and his eye reaching as far as Madame de
Villefort’s apartment, he beheld her extended lifeless on the floor.

“Go to the assistance of Madame de Villefort,” he said to the nurse.
“Madame de Villefort is ill.”

“But Mademoiselle de Villefort——” stammered the nurse.

“Mademoiselle de Villefort no longer requires help,” said d’Avrigny,
“since she is dead.”

“Dead,—dead!” groaned forth Villefort, in a paroxysm of grief, which was
the more terrible from the novelty of the sensation in the iron heart of
that man.

Villefort rose, half-ashamed of being surprised in such a paroxysm of
grief. The terrible office he had held for twenty-five years had
succeeded in making him more or less than man. His glance, at first
wandering, fixed itself upon Morrel. “Who are you, sir,” he asked, “that
forget that this is not the manner to enter a house stricken with death?
Go, sir, go!”

“Go!—do you hear?” said Villefort, while d’Avrigny advanced to lead
Morrel out. Maximilian stared for a moment at the corpse, gazed all
around the room, then upon the two men; he opened his mouth to speak,
but finding it impossible to give utterance to the innumerable ideas
that occupied his brain, he went out, thrusting his hands through his
hair in such a manner that Villefort and d’Avrigny, for a moment
diverted from the engrossing topic, exchanged glances, which seemed to
say,—“He is mad!”

But in less than five minutes the staircase groaned beneath an
extraordinary weight. Morrel was seen carrying, with superhuman
strength, the armchair containing Noirtier upstairs. When he reached the
landing he placed the armchair on the floor and rapidly rolled it into
Valentine’s room. This could only have been accomplished by means of
unnatural strength supplied by powerful excitement. But the most fearful
spectacle was Noirtier being pushed towards the bed, his face expressing
all his meaning, and his eyes supplying the want of every other faculty.
That pale face and flaming glance appeared to Villefort like a frightful
apparition. Each time he had been brought into contact with his father,
something terrible had happened.

Villefort drew back and looked with astonishment on the young man, who,
almost a stranger to him, called Noirtier his father. At this moment the
whole soul of the old man seemed centred in his eyes which became
bloodshot; the veins of the throat swelled; his cheeks and temples
became purple, as though he was struck with epilepsy; nothing was
wanting to complete this but the utterance of a cry. And the cry issued
from his pores, if we may thus speak—a cry frightful in its silence.
D’Avrigny rushed towards the old man and made him inhale a powerful
restorative.

The young man overwhelmed by the weight of his anguish, fell heavily on
his knees before the bed, which his fingers grasped with convulsive
energy. D’Avrigny, unable to bear the sight of this touching emotion,
turned away; and Villefort, without seeking any further explanation, and
attracted towards him by the irresistible magnetism which draws us
towards those who have loved the people for whom we mourn, extended his
hand towards the young man.

But Morrel saw nothing; he had grasped the hand of Valentine, and unable
to weep vented his agony in groans as he bit the sheets. For some time
nothing was heard in that chamber but sobs, exclamations, and prayers.
At length Villefort, the most composed of all, spoke:

“You are mistaken, sir,” exclaimed Morrel, raising himself on one knee,
his heart pierced by a more acute pang than any he had yet felt—“you are
mistaken; Valentine, dying as she has, not only requires a priest, but
an avenger. You, M. de Villefort, send for the priest; I will be the
avenger.”

“What do you mean, sir?” asked Villefort, trembling at the new idea
inspired by the delirium of Morrel.

Villefort hung his head, d’Avrigny approached nearer, and Noirtier said
“Yes” with his eyes.

The young man’s implacable eyes interrogated Villefort, who, on his
side, glanced from Noirtier to d’Avrigny. But instead of finding
sympathy in the eyes of the doctor and his father, he only saw an
expression as inflexible as that of Maximilian.

“Sir,” said Villefort, striving to struggle against this triple force
and his own emotion,—“sir, you are deceived; no one commits crimes here.
I am stricken by fate. It is horrible, indeed, but no one assassinates.”

“Oh, you rave, sir,” exclaimed Villefort, in vain endeavoring to escape
the net in which he was taken.

“I rave?” said Morrel; “well, then, I appeal to M. d’Avrigny himself.
Ask him, sir, if he recollects the words he uttered in the garden of
this house on the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death. You thought
yourselves alone, and talked about that tragical death, and the fatality
you mentioned then is the same which has caused the murder of
Valentine.” Villefort and d’Avrigny exchanged looks.

“Yes, yes,” continued Morrel; “recall the scene, for the words you
thought were only given to silence and solitude fell into my ears.
Certainly, after witnessing the culpable indolence manifested by M. de
Villefort towards his own relations, I ought to have denounced him to
the authorities; then I should not have been an accomplice to thy death,
as I now am, sweet, beloved Valentine; but the accomplice shall become
the avenger. This fourth murder is apparent to all, and if thy father
abandon thee, Valentine, it is I, and I swear it, that shall pursue the
assassin.”

“Oh, merciful Heavens!” murmured Villefort. Morrel raised his head, and
reading the eyes of the old man, which gleamed with unnatural lustre,—

“You wish to remain alone with M. de Villefort?”

“Oh,” said Villefort, inexpressibly delighted to think that the
inquiries were to be made by him alone,—“oh, be satisfied, I can
understand my father.” While uttering these words with this expression
of joy, his teeth clashed together violently.

D’Avrigny took the young man’s arm, and led him out of the room. A more
than deathlike silence then reigned in the house. At the end of a
quarter of an hour a faltering footstep was heard, and Villefort
appeared at the door of the apartment where d’Avrigny and Morrel had
been staying, one absorbed in meditation, the other in grief.

Morrel looked attentively on Villefort. His face was livid, large drops
rolled down his face, and in his fingers he held the fragments of a
quill pen which he had torn to atoms.

“I entreat you——” continued Villefort.

“Do not alarm yourself, sir; justice will be done,” said Villefort. “My
father has revealed the culprit’s name; my father thirsts for revenge as
much as you do, yet even he conjures you as I do to keep this secret. Do
you not, father?”

“Oh, sir,” said Villefort, arresting Maximilian by the arm, “if my
father, the inflexible man, makes this request, it is because he knows,
be assured, that Valentine will be terribly revenged. Is it not so,
father?”

The old man made a sign in the affirmative. Villefort continued:

“Swear, then,” said Villefort, joining the hands of Morrel and
d’Avrigny, “swear that you will spare the honor of my house, and leave
me to avenge my child.”

We have before stated that all the servants had fled. M. de Villefort
was therefore obliged to request M. d’Avrigny to superintend all the
arrangements consequent upon a death in a large city, more especially a
death under such suspicious circumstances.

It was something terrible to witness the silent agony, the mute despair
of Noirtier, whose tears silently rolled down his cheeks. Villefort
retired to his study, and d’Avrigny left to summon the doctor of the
mayoralty, whose office it is to examine bodies after decease, and who
is expressly named “the doctor of the dead.” M. Noirtier could not be
persuaded to quit his grandchild. At the end of a quarter of an hour M.
d’Avrigny returned with his associate; they found the outer gate closed,
and not a servant remaining in the house; Villefort himself was obliged
to open to them. But he stopped on the landing; he had not the courage
to again visit the death chamber. The two doctors, therefore, entered
the room alone. Noirtier was near the bed, pale, motionless, and silent
as the corpse. The district doctor approached with the indifference of a
man accustomed to spend half his time amongst the dead; he then lifted
the sheet which was placed over the face, and just unclosed the lips.

A tear, which appeared in the old man’s eye, expressed his thanks to the
doctor. The doctor of the dead then laid his permit on the corner of the
table, and having fulfilled his duty, was conducted out by d’Avrigny.
Villefort met them at the door of his study; having in a few words
thanked the district doctor, he turned to d’Avrigny, and said:

“No.” said Villefort; “fetch the nearest.”

“D’Avrigny,” said Villefort, “be so kind, I beseech you, as to accompany
this gentleman. Here is the key of the door, so that you can go in and
out as you please; you will bring the priest with you, and will oblige
me by introducing him into my child’s room.”

And M. de Villefort, giving the key to d’Avrigny, again bade farewell to
the strange doctor, and retired to his study, where he began to work.
For some temperaments work is a remedy for all afflictions.

“Sir,” he said, “are you disposed to confer a great obligation on an
unhappy father who has just lost his daughter? I mean M. de Villefort,
the king’s attorney.”

D’Avrigny took the priest’s hand, and without meeting Villefort, who was
engaged in his study, they reached Valentine’s room, which on the
following night was to be occupied by the undertakers. On entering the
room, Noirtier’s eyes met those of the abbé, and no doubt he read some
particular expression in them, for he remained in the room. D’Avrigny
recommended the attention of the priest to the living as well as to the
dead, and the abbé promised to devote his prayers to Valentine and his
attentions to Noirtier.

In order, doubtless, that he might not be disturbed while fulfilling his
sacred mission, the priest rose as soon as d’Avrigny departed, and not
only bolted the door through which the doctor had just left, but also
that leading to Madame de Villefort’s room.

During the evening two men, engaged for the purpose, had carried
Noirtier from Valentine’s room into his own, and contrary to all
expectation there was no difficulty in withdrawing him from his child.
The Abbé Busoni had watched till daylight, and then left without calling
anyone. D’Avrigny returned about eight o’clock in the morning; he met
Villefort on his way to Noirtier’s room, and accompanied him to see how
the old man had slept. They found him in the large armchair, which
served him for a bed, enjoying a calm, nay, almost a smiling sleep. They
both stood in amazement at the door.

“See,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, “nature knows how to alleviate the
deepest sorrow. No one can say that M. Noirtier did not love his child,
and yet he sleeps.”

“Yes, you are right,” replied Villefort, surprised; “he sleeps, indeed!
And this is the more strange, since the least contradiction keeps him
awake all night.”

“See, I have not slept,” said Villefort, showing his undisturbed bed;
“grief does not stun me. I have not been in bed for two nights; but then
look at my desk; see what I have written during these two days and
nights. I have filled those papers, and have made out the accusation
against the assassin Benedetto. Oh, work, work,—my passion, my joy, my
delight,—it is for thee to alleviate my sorrows!” and he convulsively
grasped the hand of d’Avrigny.

“No,” said Villefort; “only return again at eleven o’clock; at twelve
the—the—oh, Heavens, my poor, poor child!” and the procureur again
becoming a man, lifted up his eyes and groaned.

And, indeed, no sooner had the doctor left the room, than he was again
absorbed in work. On the doorsteps d’Avrigny met the cousin whom
Villefort had mentioned, a personage as insignificant in our story as in
the world he occupied—one of those beings designed from their birth to
make themselves useful to others. He was punctual, dressed in black,
with crape around his hat, and presented himself at his cousin’s with a
face made up for the occasion, and which he could alter as might be
required.

Gradually the reception-room filled, and some of our old friends made
their appearance—we mean Debray, Château-Renaud, and Beauchamp,
accompanied by all the leading men of the day at the bar, in literature,
or the army, for M. de Villefort moved in the first Parisian circles,
less owing to his social position than to his personal merit.

“It has been mentioned, but the article is not mine; indeed, I doubt if
it will please M. Villefort, for it says that if four successive deaths
had happened anywhere else than in the house of the king’s attorney, he
would have interested himself somewhat more about it.”

“Morrel? Do they know him?” asked Château-Renaud. “I think he has only
been introduced to Madame de Villefort.”

“By the way,” said M. de Boville, “are you not going to the funeral of
poor Mademoiselle de Villefort, which I met on my road here?”

M. de Boville had indeed met the funeral procession which was taking
Valentine to her last home on earth. The weather was dull and stormy, a
cold wind shook the few remaining yellow leaves from the boughs of the
trees, and scattered them among the crowd which filled the boulevards.
M. de Villefort, a true Parisian, considered the cemetery of Père-
Lachaise alone worthy of receiving the mortal remains of a Parisian
family; there alone the corpses belonging to him would be surrounded by
worthy associates. He had therefore purchased a vault, which was quickly
occupied by members of his family. On the front of the monument was
inscribed: “The families of Saint-Méran and Villefort,” for such had
been the last wish expressed by poor Renée, Valentine’s mother. The
pompous procession therefore wended its way towards Père-Lachaise from
the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. Having crossed Paris, it passed through the
Faubourg du Temple, then leaving the exterior boulevards, it reached the
cemetery. More than fifty private carriages followed the twenty
mourning-coaches, and behind them more than five hundred persons joined
in the procession on foot.

“Bah,” said Debray; “he scarcely knew Mademoiselle de Villefort; you
said so yourself.”

“I have 1,060,000 francs remaining,” he said. “What a pity Mademoiselle
de Villefort is dead! She suited me in every respect, and I would have
married her.”

M. de Villefort had not seen his father since the morning of the death.
The whole establishment had been changed; another valet was engaged for
himself, a new servant for Noirtier, two women had entered Madame de
Villefort’s service,—in fact, everywhere, to the concierge and coachmen,
new faces were presented to the different masters of the house, thus
widening the division which had always existed between the members of
the same family. The assizes, also, were about to begin, and Villefort,
shut up in his room, exerted himself with feverish anxiety in drawing up
the case against the murderer of Caderousse. This affair, like all those
in which the Count of Monte Cristo had interfered, caused a great
sensation in Paris. The proofs were certainly not convincing, since they
rested upon a few words written by an escaped galley-slave on his death-
bed, and who might have been actuated by hatred or revenge in accusing
his companion. But the mind of the procureur was made up; he felt
assured that Benedetto was guilty, and he hoped by his skill in
conducting this aggravated case to flatter his self-love, which was
about the only vulnerable point left in his frozen heart.

The case was therefore prepared owing to the incessant labor of
Villefort, who wished it to be the first on the list in the coming
assizes. He had been obliged to seclude himself more than ever, to evade
the enormous number of applications presented to him for the purpose of
obtaining tickets of admission to the court on the day of trial. And
then so short a time had elapsed since the death of poor Valentine, and
the gloom which overshadowed the house was so recent, that no one
wondered to see the father so absorbed in his professional duties, which
were the only means he had of dissipating his grief.

Once only had Villefort seen his father; it was the day after that upon
which Bertuccio had paid his second visit to Benedetto, when the latter
was to learn his father’s name. The magistrate, harassed and fatigued,
had descended to the garden of his house, and in a gloomy mood, similar
to that in which Tarquin lopped off the tallest poppies, he began
knocking off with his cane the long and dying branches of the rose-
trees, which, placed along the avenue, seemed like the spectres of the
brilliant flowers which had bloomed in the past season.

The eye of the old man was riveted upon a spot which Villefort could
scarcely distinguish. His glance was so full of hate, of ferocity, and
savage impatience, that Villefort turned out of the path he had been
pursuing, to see upon what person this dark look was directed.

Then he saw beneath a thick clump of linden-trees, which were nearly
divested of foliage, Madame de Villefort sitting with a book in her
hand, the perusal of which she frequently interrupted to smile upon her
son, or to throw back his elastic ball, which he obstinately threw from
the drawing-room into the garden.

Villefort became pale; he understood the old man’s meaning.

Noirtier continued to look at the same object, but suddenly his glance
was transferred from the wife to the husband, and Villefort himself had
to submit to the searching investigation of eyes, which, while changing
their direction and even their language, had lost none of their menacing
expression. Madame de Villefort, unconscious of the passions that
exhausted their fire over her head, at that moment held her son’s ball,
and was making signs to him to reclaim it with a kiss. Edward begged for
a long while, the maternal kiss probably not offering sufficient
recompense for the trouble he must take to obtain it; however at length
he decided, leaped out of the window into a cluster of heliotropes and
daisies, and ran to his mother, his forehead streaming with
perspiration. Madame de Villefort wiped his forehead, pressed her lips
upon it, and sent him back with the ball in one hand and some bonbons in
the other.

Villefort, drawn by an irresistible attraction, like that of the bird to
the serpent, walked towards the house. As he approached it, Noirtier’s
gaze followed him, and his eyes appeared of such a fiery brightness that
Villefort felt them pierce to the depths of his heart. In that earnest
look might be read a deep reproach, as well as a terrible menace. Then
Noirtier raised his eyes to heaven, as though to remind his son of a
forgotten oath.

“It is well, sir,” replied Villefort from below,—“it is well; have
patience but one day longer; what I have said I will do.”

Noirtier seemed to be calmed by these words, and turned his eyes with
indifference to the other side. Villefort violently unbuttoned his
greatcoat, which seemed to strangle him, and passing his livid hand
across his forehead, entered his study.

The night was cold and still; the family had all retired to rest but
Villefort, who alone remained up, and worked till five o’clock in the
morning, reviewing the last interrogatories made the night before by the
examining magistrates, compiling the depositions of the witnesses, and
putting the finishing stroke to the deed of accusation, which was one of
the most energetic and best conceived of any he had yet delivered.

The next day, Monday, was the first sitting of the assizes. The morning
dawned dull and gloomy, and Villefort saw the dim gray light shine upon
the lines he had traced in red ink. The magistrate had slept for a short
time while the lamp sent forth its final struggles; its flickerings
awoke him, and he found his fingers as damp and purple as though they
had been dipped in blood.

He opened the window; a bright yellow streak crossed the sky, and seemed
to divide in half the poplars, which stood out in black relief on the
horizon. In the clover-fields beyond the chestnut-trees, a lark was
mounting up to heaven, while pouring out her clear morning song. The
damps of the dew bathed the head of Villefort, and refreshed his memory.

His head dropped upon his chest, and in this position he paced his
study; then he threw himself, dressed as he was, upon a sofa, less to
sleep than to rest his limbs, cramped with cold and study. By degrees
everyone awoke. Villefort, from his study, heard the successive noises
which accompany the life of a house,—the opening and shutting of doors,
the ringing of Madame de Villefort’s bell, to summon the waiting-maid,
mingled with the first shouts of the child, who rose full of the
enjoyment of his age. Villefort also rang; his new valet brought him the
papers, and with them a cup of chocolate.

The valet then left the room. Villefort looked for an instant with a
gloomy expression, then, suddenly, taking it up with a nervous motion,
he swallowed its contents at one draught. It might have been thought
that he hoped the beverage would be mortal, and that he sought for death
to deliver him from a duty which he would rather die than fulfil. He
then rose, and paced his room with a smile it would have been terrible
to witness. The chocolate was inoffensive, for M. de Villefort felt no
effects.

The breakfast-hour arrived, but M. de Villefort was not at table. The
valet re-entered.

“Madame de Villefort wishes to remind you, sir,” he said, “that eleven
o’clock has just struck, and that the trial commences at twelve.”

“Well,” said Villefort, “what then?”

“Madame de Villefort is dressed; she is quite ready, and wishes to know
if she is to accompany you, sir?”

“Ah,” said Villefort, with a startling accent; “does she wish that?”

Villefort remained silent for a moment, and dented his pale cheeks with
his nails.

And Villefort, with his papers under his arm and hat in hand, directed
his steps toward the apartment of his wife.

At the door he paused for a moment to wipe his damp, pale brow. He then
entered the room. Madame de Villefort was sitting on an ottoman and
impatiently turning over the leaves of some newspapers and pamphlets
which young Edward, by way of amusing himself, was tearing to pieces
before his mother could finish reading them. She was dressed to go out,
her bonnet was placed beside her on a chair, and her gloves were on her
hands.

Madame de Villefort had multiplied her questions in order to gain one
answer, but to all her inquiries M. de Villefort remained mute and cold
as a statue.

“Edward,” said Villefort, fixing an imperious glance on the child, “go
and play in the drawing-room, my dear; I wish to speak to your mamma.”

Madame de Villefort shuddered at the sight of that cold countenance,
that resolute tone, and the awfully strange preliminaries. Edward raised
his head, looked at his mother, and then, finding that she did not
confirm the order, began cutting off the heads of his leaden soldiers.

“Edward,” cried M. de Villefort, so harshly that the child started up
from the floor, “do you hear me?—Go!”

M. de Villefort went to the door, which he closed behind the child, and
bolted.

“Dear me!” said the young woman, endeavoring to read her husband’s
inmost thoughts, while a smile passed over her countenance which froze
the impassibility of Villefort; “what is the matter?”

Madame de Villefort must have experienced something of the sensation of
a bird which, looking up, sees the murderous trap closing over its head.

“I asked you,” continued Villefort, in a perfectly calm tone, “where you
conceal the poison by the aid of which you have killed my father-in-law,
M. de Saint-Méran, my mother-in-law, Madame de Saint-Méran, Barrois, and
my daughter Valentine.”

“Ah, sir,” exclaimed Madame de Villefort, clasping her hands, “what do
you say?”

“Is it to the judge or to the husband?” stammered Madame de Villefort.

“You do not answer, madame!” exclaimed the terrible interrogator. Then
he added, with a smile yet more terrible than his anger, “It is true,
then; you do not deny it!” She moved forward. “And you cannot deny it!”
added Villefort, extending his hand toward her, as though to seize her
in the name of justice. “You have accomplished these different crimes
with impudent address, but which could only deceive those whose
affections for you blinded them. Since the death of Madame de Saint-
Méran, I have known that a poisoner lived in my house. M. d’Avrigny
warned me of it. After the death of Barrois my suspicions were directed
towards an angel,—those suspicions which, even when there is no crime,
are always alive in my heart; but after the death of Valentine, there
has been no doubt in my mind, madame, and not only in mine, but in those
of others; thus your crime, known by two persons, suspected by many,
will soon become public, and, as I told you just now, you no longer
speak to the husband, but to the judge.”

“Are you, then, a coward?” cried Villefort, in a contemptuous voice.
“But I have always observed that poisoners were cowards. Can you be a
coward, you, who have had the courage to witness the death of two old
men and a young girl murdered by you?”

“Can you be a coward?” continued Villefort, with increasing excitement,
“you, who could count, one by one, the minutes of four death agonies?
You, who have arranged your infernal plans, and removed the beverages
with a talent and precision almost miraculous? Have you, then, who have
calculated everything with such nicety, have you forgotten to calculate
one thing—I mean where the revelation of your crimes will lead you to?
Oh, it is impossible—you must have saved some surer, more subtle and
deadly poison than any other, that you might escape the punishment that
you deserve. You have done this—I hope so, at least.”

Madame de Villefort stretched out her hands, and fell on her knees.

“The punishment?” exclaimed Madame de Villefort, “the punishment,
monsieur? Twice you have pronounced that word!”

Madame de Villefort uttered a wild cry, and a hideous and uncontrollable
terror spread over her distorted features.

Madame de Villefort raised her arms to heaven, and convulsively struck
one hand against the other.

“What I do not wish, madame, is that you should perish on the scaffold.
Do you understand?” asked Villefort.

“She is cowardly,” said Villefort.

“I?—I kill my boy?” cried the distracted mother, rushing toward
Villefort; “I kill my son? Ha, ha, ha!” and a frightful, demoniac laugh
finished the sentence, which was lost in a hoarse rattle.

Madame de Villefort fell at her husband’s feet. He approached her.

Madame de Villefort sighed; her nerves gave way, and she sunk on the
carpet. The king’s attorney seemed to experience a sensation of pity; he
looked upon her less severely, and, bowing to her, said slowly:

That farewell struck Madame de Villefort like the executioner’s knife.
She fainted. The procureur went out, after having double-locked the
door.

It was one of the magnificent autumn days which make amends for a short
summer; the clouds which M. de Villefort had perceived at sunrise had
all disappeared as if by magic, and one of the softest and most
brilliant days of September shone forth in all its splendor.

“It was an impossibility; for the last week M. de Villefort has secluded
himself. It is natural enough; this strange chain of domestic
afflictions, followed by the no less strange death of his daughter——”

“Ah, yes, so I was. But how is it that Madame de Villefort is not here?”

“Well, do you know why they die so multitudinously at M. de
Villefort’s?”

“But the thing itself is at M. de Villefort’s; but let’s get back to the
subject.”

“Well, gentlemen, the reason people die so multitudinously (I like the
word) at M. de Villefort’s is that there is an assassin in the house!”

“Not at all. I yesterday engaged a servant, who had just left M. de
Villefort—I intend sending him away tomorrow, for he eats so enormously,
to make up for the fast imposed upon him by his terror in that house.
Well, now listen.”

The judges took their places in the midst of the most profound silence;
the jury took their seats; M. de Villefort, the object of unusual
attention, and we had almost said of general admiration, sat in the
armchair and cast a tranquil glance around him. Everyone looked with
astonishment on that grave and severe face, whose calm expression
personal griefs had been unable to disturb, and the aspect of a man who
was a stranger to all human emotions excited something very like terror.

The president called for the indictment, revised as we know, by the
clever and implacable pen of Villefort. During the reading of this,
which was long, the public attention was continually drawn towards
Andrea, who bore the inspection with Spartan unconcern. Villefort had
never been so concise and eloquent. The crime was depicted in the most
vivid colors; the former life of the prisoner, his transformation, a
review of his life from the earliest period, were set forth with all the
talent that a knowledge of human life could furnish to a mind like that
of the procureur. Benedetto was thus forever condemned in public opinion
before the sentence of the law could be pronounced.

Andrea paid no attention to the successive charges which were brought
against him. M. de Villefort, who examined him attentively, and who no
doubt practiced upon him all the psychological studies he was accustomed
to use, in vain endeavored to make him lower his eyes, notwithstanding
the depth and profundity of his gaze. At length the reading of the
indictment was ended.

The astonished president looked at the jury, who in turn looked at
Villefort. The whole assembly manifested great surprise, but Andrea
appeared quite unmoved.

M. de Villefort, who was busy taking down some notes, raised his head at
the mention of this date.

M. de Villefort a second time raised his head, looked at Benedetto as if
he had been gazing at the head of Medusa, and became livid. As for
Benedetto, he gracefully wiped his lips with a fine cambric pocket-
handkerchief.

A murmur, or rather storm, of indignation burst from all parts of the
assembly. The judges themselves appeared to be stupefied, and the jury
manifested tokens of disgust for a cynicism so unexpected in a man of
fashion. M. de Villefort pressed his hand upon his brow, which, at first
pale, had become red and burning; then he suddenly arose and looked
around as though he had lost his senses—he wanted air.

M. de Villefort answered nothing, but sat, or rather threw himself down
again upon his chair.

A painful giddiness overwhelmed Villefort; great drops of acrid sweat
fell from his face upon the papers which he held in his convulsed hand.

“King’s attorney?” said the president, stupefied, and without noticing
the agitation which spread over the face of M. de Villefort; “king’s
attorney?”

“Yes; and if you wish to know his name, I will tell it,—he is named
Villefort.”

Several persons hurried up to M. de Villefort, who sat half bowed over
in his chair, offering him consolation, encouragement, and protestations
of zeal and sympathy. Order was re-established in the hall, except that
a few people still moved about and whispered to one another. A lady, it
was said, had just fainted; they had supplied her with a smelling-
bottle, and she had recovered. During the scene of tumult, Andrea had
turned his smiling face towards the assembly; then, leaning with one
hand on the oaken rail of the dock, in the most graceful attitude
possible, he said:

“Gentlemen, I assure you I had no idea of insulting the court, or of
making a useless disturbance in the presence of this honorable assembly.
They ask my age; I tell it. They ask where I was born; I answer. They
ask my name, I cannot give it, since my parents abandoned me. But though
I cannot give my own name, not possessing one, I can tell them my
father’s. Now I repeat, my father is named M. de Villefort, and I am
ready to prove it.”

“I said anything I pleased, in order that the solemn declaration I have
just made should not be withheld, which otherwise would certainly have
been the case. I now repeat that I was born at Auteuil on the night of
the 27th of September, 1817, and that I am the son of the procureur, M.
de Villefort. Do you wish for any further details? I will give them. I
was born in No. 28, Rue de la Fontaine, in a room hung with red damask;
my father took me in his arms, telling my mother I was dead, wrapped me
in a napkin marked with an H and an N, and carried me into a garden,
where he buried me alive.”

A shudder ran through the assembly when they saw that the confidence of
the prisoner increased in proportion to the terror of M. de Villefort.

Just then a piercing cry, ending in a sob, burst from the centre of the
crowd, who encircled the lady who had before fainted, and who now fell
into a violent fit of hysterics. She was carried out of the hall, the
thick veil which concealed her face dropped off, and Madame Danglars was
recognized. Notwithstanding his shattered nerves, the ringing sensation
in his ears, and the madness which turned his brain, Villefort rose as
he perceived her.

“Well, then, look at M. de Villefort, and then ask me for proofs.”

“No, no, it is useless,” stammered M. de Villefort in a hoarse voice;
“no, it is useless!”

“What, M. de Villefort,” cried the president, “do you yield to an
hallucination? What, are you no longer in possession of your senses?
This strange, unexpected, terrible accusation has disordered your
reason. Come, recover.”

Notwithstanding the density of the crowd, M. de Villefort saw it open
before him. There is something so awe-inspiring in great afflictions
that even in the worst times the first emotion of a crowd has generally
been to sympathize with the sufferer in a great catastrophe. Many people
have been assassinated in a tumult, but even criminals have rarely been
insulted during trial. Thus Villefort passed through the mass of
spectators and officers of the Palais, and withdrew. Though he had
acknowledged his guilt, he was protected by his grief. There are some
situations which men understand by instinct, but which reason is
powerless to explain; in such cases the greatest poet is he who gives
utterance to the most natural and vehement outburst of sorrow. Those who
hear the bitter cry are as much impressed as if they listened to an
entire poem, and when the sufferer is sincere they are right in
regarding his outburst as sublime.

It would be difficult to describe the state of stupor in which Villefort
left the Palais. Every pulse beat with feverish excitement, every nerve
was strained, every vein swollen, and every part of his body seemed to
suffer distinctly from the rest, thus multiplying his agony a thousand-
fold. He made his way along the corridors through force of habit; he
threw aside his magisterial robe, not out of deference to etiquette, but
because it was an unbearable burden, a veritable garb of Nessus,
insatiate in torture. Having staggered as far as the Rue Dauphine, he
perceived his carriage, awoke his sleeping coachman by opening the door
himself, threw himself on the cushions, and pointed towards the Faubourg
Saint-Honoré; the carriage drove on.

God was still in his heart. “God,” he murmured, not knowing what he
said,—“God—God!” Behind the event that had overwhelmed him he saw the
hand of God. The carriage rolled rapidly onward. Villefort, while
turning restlessly on the cushions, felt something press against him. He
put out his hand to remove the object; it was a fan which Madame de
Villefort had left in the carriage; this fan awakened a recollection
which darted through his mind like lightning. He thought of his wife.

An hour had elapsed since her condemnation; at that moment, doubtless,
she was recalling all her crimes to her memory; she was asking pardon
for her sins; perhaps she was even writing a letter imploring
forgiveness from her virtuous husband—a forgiveness she was purchasing
with her death! Villefort again groaned with anguish and despair.

And Villefort dashed open the window in front of the carriage.

“Yes, yes,” repeated Villefort, as he approached his home—“yes, that
woman must live; she must repent, and educate my son, the sole survivor,
with the exception of the indestructible old man, of the wreck of my
house. She loves him; it was for his sake she has committed these
crimes. We ought never to despair of softening the heart of a mother who
loves her child. She will repent, and no one will know that she has been
guilty. The events which have taken place in my house, though they now
occupy the public mind, will be forgotten in time, or if, indeed, a few
enemies should persist in remembering them, why then I will add them to
my list of crimes. What will it signify if one, two, or three more are
added? My wife and child shall escape from this gulf, carrying treasures
with them; she will live and may yet be happy, since her child, in whom
all her love is centred, will be with her. I shall have performed a good
action, and my heart will be lighter.”

The carriage stopped at the door of the house. Villefort leaped out of
the carriage, and saw that his servants were surprised at his early
return; he could read no other expression on their features. Neither of
them spoke to him; they merely stood aside to let him pass by, as usual,
nothing more. As he passed by M. Noirtier’s room, he perceived two
figures through the half-open door; but he experienced no curiosity to
know who was visiting his father; anxiety carried him on further.

And he entered the little room in which Edward slept; for though the
child went to school during the day, his mother could not allow him to
be separated from her at night. With a single glance Villefort’s eye ran
through the room.

“Open the door!” cried Villefort. “Open; it is I.”

But notwithstanding this request, notwithstanding the tone of anguish in
which it was uttered, the door remained closed. Villefort burst it open
with a violent blow. At the entrance of the room which led to her
boudoir, Madame de Villefort was standing erect, pale, her features
contracted, and her eyes glaring horribly.

Villefort ran to her and seized her hand, which convulsively clasped a
crystal bottle with a golden stopper. Madame de Villefort was dead.
Villefort, maddened with horror, stepped back to the threshhold of the
door, fixing his eyes on the corpse.

“Where is my son?” asked Villefort; “let him be removed from the house,
that he may not see——”

“No, sir; Madame de Villefort sent for him half an hour ago; he went
into her room, and has not been downstairs since.”

A cold perspiration burst out on Villefort’s brow; his legs trembled,
and his thoughts flew about madly in his brain like the wheels of a
disordered watch.

“In Madame de Villefort’s room?” he murmured and slowly returned, with
one hand wiping his forehead, and with the other supporting himself
against the wall. To enter the room he must again see the body of his
unfortunate wife. To call Edward he must reawaken the echo of that room
which now appeared like a sepulchre; to speak seemed like violating the
silence of the tomb. His tongue was paralyzed in his mouth.

The child did not answer. Where, then, could he be, if he had entered
his mother’s room and not since returned? He stepped forward. The corpse
of Madame de Villefort was stretched across the doorway leading to the
room in which Edward must be; those glaring eyes seemed to watch over
the threshold, and the lips bore the stamp of a terrible and mysterious
irony. Through the open door was visible a portion of the boudoir,
containing an upright piano and a blue satin couch. Villefort stepped
forward two or three paces, and beheld his child lying—no doubt
asleep—on the sofa. The unhappy man uttered an exclamation of joy; a ray
of light seemed to penetrate the abyss of despair and darkness. He had
only to step over the corpse, enter the boudoir, take the child in his
arms, and flee far, far away.

Villefort was no longer the civilized man; he was a tiger hurt unto
death, gnashing his teeth in his wound. He no longer feared realities,
but phantoms. He leaped over the corpse as if it had been a burning
brazier. He took the child in his arms, embraced him, shook him, called
him, but the child made no response. He pressed his burning lips to the
cheeks, but they were icy cold and pale; he felt the stiffened limbs; he
pressed his hand upon the heart, but it no longer beat,—the child was
dead.

A folded paper fell from Edward’s breast. Villefort, thunderstruck, fell
upon his knees; the child dropped from his arms, and rolled on the floor
by the side of its mother. He picked up the paper, and, recognizing his
wife’s writing, ran his eyes rapidly over its contents; it ran as
follows:

Villefort could not believe his eyes,—he could not believe his reason;
he dragged himself towards the child’s body, and examined it as a
lioness contemplates its dead cub. Then a piercing cry escaped from his
breast, and he cried,

He descended the little staircase with which we are acquainted, and
entered Noirtier’s room. The old man appeared to be listening
attentively and as affectionately as his infirmities would allow to the
Abbé Busoni, who looked cold and calm, as usual. Villefort, perceiving
the abbé, passed his hand across his brow. The past came to him like one
of those waves whose wrath foams fiercer than the others.

“Good heavens!” exclaimed Villefort, stepping back fearfully, “surely
that is not the voice of the Abbé Busoni!”

“But what have I done to you?” exclaimed Villefort, whose mind was
balancing between reason and insanity, in that cloud which is neither a
dream nor reality; “what have I done to you? Tell me, then! Speak!”

“You are Edmond Dantès,” cried Villefort, seizing the count by the
wrist; “then come here!”

“My child,” cried Villefort, “he carries away the body of my child! Oh,
curses, woe, death to you!”

“Where is M. de Villefort?”

The servant, instead of answering, pointed to the garden. Monte Cristo
ran down the steps, and advancing towards the spot designated beheld
Villefort, encircled by his servants, with a spade in his hand, and
digging the earth with fury.

Villefort interrupted him; he had neither listened nor heard.

The recent events formed the theme of conversation throughout all Paris.
Emmanuel and his wife conversed with natural astonishment in their
little apartment in the Rue Meslay upon the three successive, sudden,
and most unexpected catastrophes of Morcerf, Danglars, and Villefort.
Maximilian, who was paying them a visit, listened to their conversation,
or rather was present at it, plunged in his accustomed state of apathy.

“Oh, Villefort, Villefort,” murmured the count, “this scene must often
have haunted thy sleepless hours!”

“There is a felucca for you at anchor. Jacopo will carry you to Leghorn,
where Monsieur Noirtier awaits his granddaughter, whom he wishes to
bless before you lead her to the altar. All that is in this grotto, my
friend, my house in the Champs-Élysées, and my château at Tréport, are
the marriage gifts bestowed by Edmond Dantès upon the son of his old
master, Morrel. Mademoiselle de Villefort will share them with you; for
I entreat her to give to the poor the immense fortune reverting to her
from her father, now a madman, and her brother who died last September
with his mother. Tell the angel who will watch over your future destiny,
Morrel, to pray sometimes for a man, who, like Satan, thought himself
for an instant equal to God, but who now acknowledges with Christian
humility that God alone possesses supreme power and infinite wisdom.
Perhaps those prayers may soften the remorse he feels in his heart. As
for you, Morrel, this is the secret of my conduct towards you. There is
neither happiness nor misery in the world; there is only the comparison
of one state with another, nothing more. He who has felt the deepest
grief is best able to experience supreme happiness. We must have felt
what it is to die, Morrel, that we may appreciate the enjoyments of
living.

