For several days it had rained continuously; the streets were chilly
and sloppy and full of dreary, cold mist; there was mud
everywhere--sticky London mud--and over everything the pall of drizzle
and fog. Of course there were several long and tiresome errands to be
done--there always were on days like this--and Sara was sent out again
and again, until her shabby clothes were damp through. The absurd old
feathers on her forlorn hat were more draggled and absurd than ever,
and her downtrodden shoes were so wet that they could not hold any more
water. Added to this, she had been deprived of her dinner, because
Miss Minchin had chosen to punish her. She was so cold and hungry and
tired that her face began to have a pinched look, and now and then some
kind-hearted person passing her in the street glanced at her with
sudden sympathy. But she did not know that. She hurried on, trying to
make her mind think of something else. It was really very necessary.
Her way of doing it was to "pretend" and "suppose" with all the
strength that was left in her. But really this time it was harder than
she had ever found it, and once or twice she thought it almost made her
more cold and hungry instead of less so. But she persevered
obstinately, and as the muddy water squelched through her broken shoes
and the wind seemed trying to drag her thin jacket from her, she talked
to herself as she walked, though she did not speak aloud or even move
her lips.
