The next morning was as lovely as the last. It was Sunday, and every
activity of the village was stilled. Sea and land were equally folded
in a sunlit calm. During breakfast--a meal abundant in fresh herrings,
fresh eggs and fresh rolls, eaten with the window wide open--Anna was
puzzled by the singular amenity of her friends to one another and to
her. They were as polite as though they had been strangers; they
chatted amiably, were full of goodwill, and as anxious to give
happiness as to enjoy it. She thought at first, so unusual was it to
her as a feature of domestic privacy, that this demeanour was affected,
or at any rate a somewhat exaggerated punctilio due to her presence;
but she soon came to see that she was mistaken. After breakfast Mr.
Sutton suggested that they should attend the Wesleyan Chapel on the
hill leading to the Chasms. Here they met the sailors of the night
before, arrayed now in marvellous blue Melton coats with velveteen
collars. Tom Kelly walked back with them to the beach, and showed them
the yacht "Fay' which Mynors had arranged to hire for mackerel-fishing;
it lay on the sands speckless in new white paint. All the afternoon
they dozed on the cliffs, doing nothing whatever, for this Sunday was
tacitly regarded, not as part of the holiday, but as a preparation for
the holiday; all felt that the holiday, with its proper exertions and
appointed delights, would really begin on Monday morning.
