The treat ended disastrously. In the middle of the children's meal,
while yet the enormous double-handled tea-cans were being carried up
and down the thirsty rows, and the boys were causing their bags to
explode with appalling detonations, it began to rain sharply. The
fickle sun withdrew his splendour from the toilettes, and was seen no
more for a week afterwards. "It's come at last," ejaculated Mynors,
who had watched the sky with anxiety for an hour previously. He
mobilised the children and ranked them under a row of elms. The
teachers, running to the tent for their own tea, said to one another
that the shower could only be a brief one. The wish was father to the
thought, for they were a little ashamed to be under cover while their
charges precariously sheltered beneath dripping trees--yet there was
nothing else to be done; the men took turns in the rain to keep the
children in their places. The sky was completely overcast. "It's set
in for a wet evening, and so we may as well make the best of it,"
Beatrice said grimly, and she sent the landau home empty. She was
right. A forlorn and disgusted snake of a procession crawled through
puddles to the station. The platform resounded with sneezes. None but
a dressmaker could have discovered a silver lining to the black and
all-pervading cloud which had ruined so many dozens of fair costumes.
Anna, melancholy and taciturn, exerted herself to minimise the
discomfort of her scholars. A word from Mynors would have been balm to
her; but Mynors, the general of a routed army, was parleying by
telephone with the traffic-manager of the railway for the expediting of
the special train.
