She was charmed with the idea--to her so audacious--and relieved that
the note was not after all from Titus or Willie Price: but again she
had to regret that her father was not at home. He would be capable of
thinking and saying that the projected expedition was a truancy,
contrived to occur in his absence. He might grumble at the house being
left without a keeper. Moreover, according to a tacit law, she never
departed from the fixed routine of her existence without first
obtaining Ephraim's approval, or at least being sure that such a
departure would not make him violently angry. She wondered whether
Mynors knew that her father was away, and, if so, whether he had chosen
that afternoon purposely. She did not care that Mynors should call for
her--it made the visit seem so formal; and as in order to reach the
works, down at Shawport by the canal-side, they would necessarily go
through the middle of the town, she foresaw infinite gossip and rumour
as one result. Already, she knew, the names of herself and Mynors were
everywhere coupled, and she could not even enter a shop without being
made aware, more or less delicately, that she was an object of piquant
curiosity. A woman is profoundly interesting to women at two periods
only--before she is betrothed and before she becomes the mother of her
firstborn. Anna was in the first period; her life did not comprise the
second. When Agnes came home to dinner from school, Anna said nothing
of Mynors' note until they had begun to wash up the dinner-things, when
she suggested that Agnes should finish this operation alone.
