The Special Teachers' Meeting to which Willie Price had referred was
one of the final preliminaries to a Revival--that is, a revival of
godliness and Christian grace--about to be undertaken by the Wesleyan
Methodist Society in Bursley. Its object was to arrange for a personal
visitation of the parents of Sunday-school scholars in their homes.
Hitherto Anna had felt but little interest in the Revival: it had
several times been brought indirectly before her notice, but she had
regarded it as a phenomenon which recurred at intervals in the cycle of
religious activity, and as not in any way affecting herself. The
gradual centring of public interest, however--that mysterious movement
which, defying analysis, gathers force as it proceeds, and ends by
coercing the most indifferent--had already modified her attitude
towards this forthcoming event. It got about that the preacher who had
been engaged, a specialist in revivals, was a man of miraculous powers:
the number of souls which he had snatched from eternal torment was
precisely stated, and it amounted to tens of thousands. He played the
cornet to the glory of God, and his cornet was of silver: his more
distant past had been ineffably wicked, and the faint rumour of that
dead wickedness clung to his name like a piquant odour. As Anna walked
up Trafalgar Road from Price's she observed that the hoardings had been
billed with great posters announcing the Revival and the revivalist,
who was to commence his work on Friday night.
