Agnes had to go to Sunday-school alone that afternoon. Without saying
anything to her father, Anna decided to stay at home. She spent the
time in her bedroom, idle, preoccupied; and did not come downstairs
till half-past three. Ephraim had gone out. Agnes presently returned,
and then Henry came in with Mr. Tellwright. They were conversing
amicably, and Anna knew that her engagement was finally and
satisfactorily settled. During tea no reference was made to it, nor to
the suicide. Mynors' demeanour was quiet but cheerful. He had partly
recovered from the morning's agitation, and gave Ephraim and Agnes a
vivacious account of the attractions of Port Erin. Anna noticed the
amusement in his eyes when Agnes, reddening, said to him: "Will you
have some more bread-and-butter, Henry?" It seemed to be tacitly
understood afterwards that Agnes and her father would attend chapel,
while Henry and Anna kept house. No one was ingenious enough to detect
an impropriety in the arrangement. For some obscure reason,
immediately upon the departure of the chapel-goers, Anna went into the
kitchen, rattled some plates, stroked her hair mechanically, and then
stole back again to the parlour. It was a chilly evening, and instead
of walking up and down the strip of garden the betrothed lovers sat
together under the window. Anna wondered whether or not she was happy.
The presence of Mynors was, at any rate, marvellously soothing.
