This accident was the ruin of Anna's scheme. Her father, always the
favourite of circumstance, had by chance struck the first blow;
ignorant of the battle that awaited him, he had unwittingly won it by
putting her in the wrong, as Titus Price had put him in the wrong. She
knew in a flash that her enterprise was hopeless; she knew that her
father's position in regard to her was impregnable, that no moral
force, no consciousness of right, would avail to overthrow that
authority which she had herself made absolute by a life-long
submission; she knew that face to face with her father she was, and
always would be, a coward. And now, instead of finding arguments for
success, she found arguments for failure. She divined all the retorts
that he would fling at her. What about Mr. Sutton--in a sense the
victim of this fraud? It was not merely a matter of thirty pounds. A
man's name had been used. Was he, Ephraim Tellwright, and she, his
daughter, to connive at a felony? The felony was done, and could not
be undone. Were they to render themselves liable, even in theory, to a
criminal prosecution? If Titus Price had killed himself, what of that?
If Willie Price was threatened with ruin, what of that? Them as made
the bed must lie on it. At the best, and apart from any forgery, the
Prices had swindled their creditors; even in dying, old Price had been
guilty of a commercial swindle. And was the fact that father and son
between them had committed a direct and flagrant crime to serve as an
excuse for sympathising with the survivor? Why was Anna so anxious to
shield the forger? What claim had he? A forger was a forger, and that
was the end of it.
