During tea it occurred to her that as soon as Agnes had gone to bed she
would put the situation plainly before her father, and, for the first
and last time in her life, assert herself. She would tell him that the
affair was, after all, entirely her own, she would firmly demand
possession of the bill of exchange, and she would insist on it being
destroyed. She would point out to the old man that, her promise having
been given to Willie Price, no other course than this was possible. In
planning this night-surprise on her father's obstinacy, she found
argument after argument auspicious of its success. The formidable
tyrant was at last to meet his equal, in force, in resolution, and in
pugnacity. The swiftness of her onrush would sweep him, for once, off
his feet. At whatever cost, she was bound to win, even though victory
resulted in eternal enmity between father and daughter. She saw
herself towering over him, morally, with blazing eye and scornful
nostril. And, thus meditating on the grandeur of her adventure, she
fed her courage with indignation. By the act of death, Titus Price had
put her father for ever in the wrong. His corpse accused the miser,
and Anna, incapable now of seeing aught save the pathos of suicide,
acquiesced in the accusation with all the strength of her remorse. She
did not reason--she felt; reason was shrivelled up in the fire of
emotion. She almost trembled with the urgency of her desire to protect
from further shame the figure of Willie Price, so frank, simple,
innocent, and big; and to protect also the lifeless and dishonoured
body of his parent. She reviewed the whole circumstances again and
again, each time finding less excuse for her father's implacable and
fatal cruelty.
