As the meeting proceeded, submitting itself more and more to the
imperious hypnotism of the revivalist, Anna gradually became oppressed
by a vague sensation which was partly sorrow and partly an inexplicable
dull anger--anger at her own penitence. She felt as if everything was
wrong and could never by any possibility be righted. After two
exhortations, from the minister and the revivalist, and another hymn,
the revivalist once more prayed, and as he did so Anna looked
stealthily about in a sick, preoccupied way. The youth at her side
stared glumly in front of him. In the orchestra Henry Mynors was
whispering to the organist. Down in the body of the chapel the
atmosphere was electric, perilous, overcharged with spiritual emotion.
She was glad she was not down there. The voice of the revivalist
ceased, but he kept the attitude of supplication. Sobs were heard in
various quarters, and here and there an elder of the chapel could be
seen talking quietly to some convicted sinner. The revivalist began
softly to sing "Jesu, lover of my soul," and most of the congregation,
standing up, joined him; but the sinners stricken of the Spirit
remained abjectly bent, tortured by conscience, pulled this way by
Christ and that by Satan. A few rose and went to the Communion rails,
there to kneel in the sight of all. Mr. Banks descended from the
pulpit and opening the wicket which led to the Communion table spoke to
these over the rails, reassuringly, as a nurse to a child. Other
sinners, desirous of fuller and more intimate guidance, passed down the
aisles and so into the preacher's vestry at the eastern end of the
chapel, and were followed thither by class-leaders and other proved
servants of God: among these last were Titus Price and Mr. Sutton.
