She opened the door and went in. None said nay, and she found a few
inches of standing-room behind the jury-box. A terrible stench
nauseated her; the chamber was crammed, and not a window open. There
was silence in the court--no one seemed to be doing anything; but at
last she perceived that the coroner, enthroned on the bench justice was
writing in a book with blue leaves. In the witness-box stood William
Price, dressed in black, with kid gloves, not lounging in an ungainly
attitude, as might have been expected, but perfectly erect; he kept his
eyes fixed on the coroner's head. Sarah Vodrey, Price's aged
housekeeper, sat on a chair near the witness-box, weeping into a
black-bordered handkerchief; at intervals she raised her small,
wrinkled, red face, with its glistening, inflamed eyes, and then buried
it again in the handkerchief. The members of the jury, whom Anna could
see only in profile, shuffled to and fro on their long, pew-like
seats--they were mostly working men, shabbily clothed; but the foreman
was Mr. Leal, the provision dealer, a freemason, and a sidesman at the
parish church. The general public sat intent and vacuous; their minds
gaped, if not their mouths; occasionally one whispered inaudibly to
another; the jury, conscious of an official status, exchanged remarks
in a whisper courageously loud. Several tall policemen, helmet in
hand, stood in various corners of the room, and the coroner's officer
sat near the witness-box to administer the oath. At length the coroner
lifted his head. He was rather a young man, with a large, intelligent
face; he wore eyeglasses, and his chin was covered with a short, wavy
beard. His manner showed that, while secretly proud of his supreme
position in that assemblage, he was deliberately trying to make it
appear that this exercise of judicial authority was nothing to him,
that in truth these eternal inquiries, which interested others so
deeply, were to him a weariness conscientiously endured.
