It was characteristic of Mynors' cautious prudence that, the first
intoxication having passed, he made no further reference of any kind to
Anna's fortune. The arrangements for their married life were planned
on a scale which ignored the fifty thousand pounds. For both their
sakes he wished to avoid all friction with the miser, at any rate until
his status as Anna's husband would enable him to enforce her rights, if
that should be necessary, with dignity and effectiveness. He did not
precisely anticipate trouble, but the fact had not escaped him that
Ephraim still held the whole of Anna's securities. He was in no hurry
to enlarge his borders. He knew that there were twenty-four hours in
every day, three hundred and sixty-five days in every year, and thirty
good years in life still left to him; and therefore that there would be
ample time, after the wedding, for the execution of his purposes in
regard to that fifty thousand pounds. Meanwhile, he told Anna that he
had set aside two hundred pounds for the purchase of furniture for the
Priory--a modest sum; but he judged it sufficient. His method was to
buy a piece at a time, always second-hand, but always good. The
bargain-hunt was up, and Anna soon yielded to its mild satisfactions.
In the matter of her trousseau and the house-linen, Anna, having
obtained the needed money--at so dear a cost--found yet another
obstacle in the imminent bazaar, which occupied Mrs. Sutton and
Beatrice so completely that they could not contrive any opportunity to
assist her in shopping. It was decided between them that every article
should be bought ready-made and seamed, and that the first week of the
New Year, if indeed Mrs. Sutton survived the bazaar, should be entirely
and absolutely devoted to Anna's business.
