She had forgotten to buy bacon, and breakfast would be late: it was a
calamity unique in her experience! She stood at the door of her
bedroom, and waited, vehemently, for Agnes's return. At last the child
raced breathlessly in; Anna flew to meet her. With incredible speed
the bacon was whipped out of its wrapper, and Anna picked up the knife.
At the first stroke she cut herself, and Agnes was obliged to bind the
finger with rag. The clock struck the half-hour like a knell. It was
twenty minutes to nine, forty minutes behind time, when the two girls
hurried into the parlour, Anna bearing the bacon and hot plates, Agnes
the bread and coffee. Mr. Tellwright sat upright and ferocious in his
chair, the image of offence and wrath. Instead of reading his letters
he had fed full of this ineffable grievance. The meal began in a
desolating silence. The male creature's terrible displeasure permeated
the whole room like an ether, invisible but carrying vibrations to the
heart. Then, when he had eaten one piece of bacon, and cut his
envelopes, the miser began to empty himself of some of his anger in
stormy tones that might have uprooted trees. Anna ought to feel
thoroughly ashamed. He could not imagine what she had been thinking
of. Why didn't she tell him she was going to the prayer-meeting? Why
did she go to the prayer-meeting, disarranging the whole household?
How came she to forget the bacon? It was gross carelessness. A pretty
example to her little sister! The fact was that _since her birthday_
she had gotten above hersen. She was careless and extravagant. Look
how thick the bacon was cut. He should not stand it much longer. And
her finger all red, and the blood dropping on the cloth: a nice sight
at a meal! Go and tie it up again.
