Suddenly the expression of her face changed from utter disgust into a
bitter and proud smile. Without thinking further, without daring to
think, she rose out of bed and, night-gowned and bare-footed, crept
with infinite precaution downstairs. The oilcloth on the stairs froze
her feet; a cold, grey light issuing through the glass square over the
front door showed that dawn was beginning. The door of the
front-parlour was shut; she opened it gently, and went within. Every
object in the room was faintly visible, the bureau, the chair, the
files of papers, the pictures, the books on the mantelshelf, and the
safe in the corner. The bureau, she knew, was never locked; fear of
their father had always kept its privacy inviolate from Anna and Agnes,
without the aid of a key. As Anna stood in front of it, a shaking
figure with hair hanging loose, she dimly remembered having one day
seen a blue paper among white in the pigeon-holes. But if the bill was
not there she vowed that she would steal her father's keys while he
slept, and force the safe. She opened the bureau, and at once saw the
edge of a blue paper corresponding with her recollection. She pulled
it forth and scanned it. "Three months after date pay to our order ...
Accepted payable, _William Sutton_." So here was the forgery, here the
two words for which Willie Price might have gone to prison! What a
trifle! She tore the flimsy document to bits, and crumpled the bits
into a little ball. How should she dispose of the ball? After a
moment's reflection she went into the kitchen, stretched on tiptoe to
reach the match-box from the high mantelpiece, struck a match, and
burnt the ball in the grate. Then, with a restrained and sinister
laugh, she ran softly upstairs.
