Nearly a week later, Anna received a postcard from Beatrice announcing
her complete recovery, and the immediate return of her parents and
herself to Bursley. That same afternoon, a cab encumbered with much
luggage passed up the street as Anna was fixing clean curtains in her
father's bedroom. Beatrice, on the look-out, waved a hand and smiled,
and Anna responded to the signals. She was glad now that the Suttons
had come back, though for several days she had almost forgotten their
existence. On the Saturday afternoon, Mynors called. Anna was in the
kitchen; she heard him scuffling with Agnes in the lobby, and then
talking to her father. Three times she had seen him since her
disgrace, and each time the secret bitterness of her soul, despite
conscientious effort to repress it, had marred the meeting--it had been
plain, indeed, that she was profoundly disturbed; he had affected at
first not to observe the change in her, and she, anticipating his
questions, hinted briefly that the trouble was with her father, and had
no reference to himself, and that she preferred not to discuss it at
all; reassured, and too young in courtship yet to presume on a lover's
rights, he respected her wish, and endeavoured by every art to restore
her to equanimity. This time, as she went to greet him in the parlour,
she resolved that he should see no more of the shadow. He noticed
instantly the difference in her face.
