The tea-room opened by a large French window into a conservatory, and a
table was laid down the whole length of the room and the conservatory.
Mr. Sutton sat at one end and the minister at the other, but neither
Mrs. Sutton nor Beatrice occupied a distinctive place. The ancient
clumsy custom of having tea-urns on the table itself had been abolished
by Beatrice, who had read in a paper that carving was now never done at
table, but by a neatly-dressed parlour-maid at the sideboard.
Consequently the tea-urns were exiled to the sideboard, and the tea
dispensed by a couple of maids. Thus, as Beatrice had explained to her
mother, the hostess was left free to devote herself to the social arts.
The board was richly spread with fancy breads and cakes, jams of Mrs.
Sutton's own celebrated preserving, diverse sandwiches compiled by
Beatrice, and one or two large examples of the famous Bursley pork-pie.
Numerous as the company was, several chairs remained empty after
everyone was seated. Anna found herself again next to Miss Dickinson,
and five places from the minister, in the conservatory. Beatrice and
her mother were higher up, in the room. Grace was sung, by request of
Mrs. Sutton. At first, silence prevailed among the guests, and the
inquiries of the maids about milk and sugar were almost painfully
audible. Then Mr. Banks, glancing up the long vista of the table and
pretending to descry some object in the distance, called out:
