Agnes, far more excited than any of the rest, seized her straw hat, and
slipping the elastic under her small chin, sprang into the cab, and
found a haven between Mr. Sutton's short, fat legs. The driver drew
his whip smartly across the aged neck of the cream mare. They were
off. What a rumbling, jolting, delicious journey, down the first hill,
up Duck Bank, through the market-place, and down the steep declivity of
Oldcastle Street! Silent and shy, Agnes smiled ecstatically at the
others. Anna answered remarks in a dream. She was conscious only of
present happiness and happy expectation. All bitterness had
disappeared. At least thirty thousand Bursley folk were not going to
the Isle of Man that day--their preoccupied and cheerless faces swam in
a continuous stream past the cab window--and Anna sympathised with
every unit of them. Her spirit overflowed with universal compassion.
What haste and exquisite confusion at the station! The train was
signalled, and the porter, crossing the line with the luggage, ran his
truck perilously under the very buffers of the incoming engine. Mynors
was awaiting them, admirably attired as a tourist. He had got the
tickets, and secured a private compartment in the through-coach for
Liverpool; and he found time to arrange with the cabman to drive Agnes
home on the box-seat. Certainly there was none like Mynors. From the
footboard of the carriage Anna bent down to kiss Agnes. The child had
been laughing and chattering. Suddenly, as Anna's lips touched hers,
she burst into tears, sobbed passionately as though overtaken by some
terrible and unexpected misfortune. Tears stood also in Anna's eyes.
The sisters had never been parted before.
