So the days passed, without much variety, for the Suttons were not
addicted to excursions. Anna was profoundly happy; she had forgotten
care. She agreed to every suggestion for amusement; each moment had
its pleasure, and this pleasure was quite independent of the thing
done; it sprang from all activities and idlenesses. She was at special
pains to fraternise with Mr. Sutton. He made an interesting companion,
full of facts about strata, outcrops, and breaks, his sole weakness
being the habit of quoting extremely sentimental scraps of verse when
walking by the sea-shore. He frankly enjoyed Anna's attention to him,
and took pride in her society. Mrs. Sutton, that simple heart, devoted
herself to the attainment of absolute quiescence. She had come for a
rest, and she achieved her purpose. Her kindliness became for the time
passive instead of active. Beatrice was a changing quantity in the
domestic equation. Plainly her parents had spoiled their only child,
and she had frequent fits of petulance, particularly with Mynors; but
her energy and spirits atoned well for these. As for Mynors, he
behaved exactly as on the first Monday. He spent many hours alone with
Anna--(Beatrice appeared to insist on leaving them together, even while
showing a faint resentment at the loneliness thus entailed on
herself)--and his attitude was such as Anna, ignorant of the ways of
brothers, deemed a brother might adopt.
