On the following day she had to sign a cheque which reduced her
bank-balance to about three pounds. Perhaps it was the knowledge of
this reduction that led Ephraim Tellwright to resume at once and with
fresh rigour his new policy of 'squeezing the last penny' out of Titus
Price (despite the fact that the latter had already achieved the
incredible by paying thirty pounds in little more than a month), thus
causing the catastrophe which soon afterwards befell. What methods her
father was adopting Anna did not know, since he said no word to her
about the matter: she only knew that Agnes had twice been dispatched
with notes to Edward Street. One day, about noon, a clay-soiled urchin
brought a letter addressed to herself: she guessed that it was some
appeal for mercy from the Prices, and wished that her father had been
at home. The old man was away for the whole day, attending a sale of
property at Axe, the agricultural town in the north of the county,
locally styled 'the metropolis of the moorlands." Anna read:--"My dear
Miss Tellwright,--Now that our partnership is an accomplished fact,
will you not come and look over the works? I should much like you to
do so. I shall be passing your house this afternoon about two, and
will call on the chance of being able to take you down with me to the
works. If you are unable to come no harm will be done, and some other
day can be arranged; but of course I shall be disappointed.--Believe
me, yours most sincerely, HY. MYNORS."
