The next day at half-past three Anna, having put on her best clothes,
was ready to start. She had seen almost nothing of social life, and
the prospect of taking part in this entertainment of the Suttons filled
her with trepidation. Should she arrive early, in which case she would
have to talk more, or late, in which case there would be the ordeal of
entering a crowded room? She could not decide. She went into her
father's bedroom, whose window overlooked Trafalgar Road, and saw from
behind a curtain that small groups of ladies were continually passing
up the street to disappear into Alderman Sutton's house. Most of the
women she recognised; others she knew but vaguely by sight. Then the
stream ceased, and suddenly she heard the kitchen clock strike four.
She ran downstairs--Agnes, swollen by importance, was carrying her
father's tea into the parlour--and hastened out the back way. In
another moment she was at the Suttons' front-door. A servant in black
alpaca, with white wristbands, cap, streams, and embroidered apron
(each article a _dernier cri_ from Bostock's great shop at Hanbridge),
asked her in a subdued and respectful tone to step within. Externally
there had been no sign of the unusual, but once inside the house Anna
found it a humming hive of activity. Women laden with stuffs and
implements were crossing the picture-hung hall, their footsteps
noiseless on the thick rugs which lay about in rich confusion. On
either hand was an open door, and from each door came the sound of many
eager voices. Beyond these doors a broad staircase rose majestically
to unseen heights, closing the vista of the hall. As the servant was
demanding Anna's name, Beatrice Sutton, radiant and gorgeous, came with
a rush out of the room to the left, the dining-room, and, taking her by
both hands, kissed her.
