"Hush! hush! Mr. Sikes," said the Jew, trembling; "don't speak so loud!"

"Well, well, then--Bill Sikes," said the Jew, with abject humility.
"You seem out of humour, Bill."

"Perhaps I am," replied Sikes; "I should think you was rather out of
sorts too, unless you mean as little harm when you throw pewter pots
about, as you do when you blab and--"

Mr. Sikes contented himself with tying an imaginary knot under his left
ear, and jerking his head over on the right shoulder; a piece of dumb
show which the Jew appeared to understand perfectly. He then, in cant
terms, with which his whole conversation was plentifully besprinkled,
but which would be quite unintelligible if they were recorded here,
demanded a glass of liquor.

"And mind you don't poison it," said Mr. Sikes, laying his hat upon the
table.

After swallowing two of three glasses of spirits, Mr. Sikes
condescended to take some notice of the young gentlemen; which gracious
act led to a conversation, in which the cause and manner of Oliver's
capture were circumstantially detailed, with such alterations and
improvements on the truth, as to the Dodger appeared most advisable
under the circumstances.

"That's very likely," returned Sikes with a malicious grin. "You're
blowed upon, Fagin."

"Somebody must find out wot's been done at the office," said Mr. Sikes
in a much lower tone than he had taken since he came in.

"If he hasn't peached, and is committed, there's no fear till he comes
out again," said Mr. Sikes, "and then he must be taken care on. You
must get hold of him somehow."

The prudence of this line of action, indeed, was obvious; but,
unfortunately, there was one very strong objection to its being
adopted. This was, that the Dodger, and Charley Bates, and Fagin, and
Mr. William Sikes, happened, one and all, to entertain a violent and
deeply-rooted antipathy to going near a police-office on any ground or
pretext whatever.

"What do you mean by that?" said Mr. Sikes, looking up in a surly
manner.

"Why, you're just the very person for it," reasoned Mr. Sikes: "nobody
about here knows anything of you."

"She'll go, Fagin," said Sikes.

"Yes, she will, Fagin," said Sikes.

And Mr. Sikes was right. By dint of alternate threats, promises, and
bribes, the lady in question was ultimately prevailed upon to undertake
the commission. She was not, indeed, withheld by the same
considerations as her agreeable friend; for, having recently removed
into the neighborhood of Field Lane from the remote but genteel suburb
of Ratcliffe, she was not under the same apprehension of being
recognised by any of her numerous acquaintances.

"Give her a door-key to carry in her t"other one, Fagin," said Sikes;
"it looks real and genivine like."

"She's a honour to her sex," said Mr. Sikes, filling his glass, and
smiting the table with his enormous fist. "Here's her health, and
wishing they was all like her!"

Mr. Bill Sikes no sooner heard the account of the expedition delivered,
than he very hastily called up the white dog, and, putting on his hat,
expeditiously departed: without devoting any time to the formality of
wishing the company good-morning.

In the obscure parlour of a low public-house, in the filthiest part of
Little Saffron Hill; a dark and gloomy den, where a flaring gas-light
burnt all day in the winter-time; and where no ray of sun ever shone in
the summer: there sat, brooding over a little pewter measure and a
small glass, strongly impregnated with the smell of liquor, a man in a
velveteen coat, drab shorts, half-boots and stockings, whom even by
that dim light no experienced agent of the police would have hesitated
to recognise as Mr. William Sikes. At his feet, sat a white-coated,
red-eyed dog; who occupied himself, alternately, in winking at his
master with both eyes at the same time; and in licking a large, fresh
cut on one side of his mouth, which appeared to be the result of some
recent conflict.

"Keep quiet, you warmint! Keep quiet!" said Mr. Sikes, suddenly
breaking silence. Whether his meditations were so intense as to be
disturbed by the dog's winking, or whether his feelings were so wrought
upon by his reflections that they required all the relief derivable
from kicking an unoffending animal to allay them, is matter for
argument and consideration. Whatever was the cause, the effect was a
kick and a curse, bestowed upon the dog simultaneously.

Dogs are not generally apt to revenge injuries inflicted upon them by
their masters; but Mr. Sikes's dog, having faults of temper in common
with his owner, and labouring, perhaps, at this moment, under a
powerful sense of injury, made no more ado but at once fixed his teeth
in one of the half-boots. Having given in a hearty shake, he retired,
growling, under a form; just escaping the pewter measure which Mr.
Sikes levelled at his head.

"You would, would you?" said Sikes, seizing the poker in one hand, and
deliberately opening with the other a large clasp-knife, which he drew
from his pocket. "Come here, you born devil! Come here! D'ye hear?"

The dog no doubt heard; because Mr. Sikes spoke in the very harshest
key of a very harsh voice; but, appearing to entertain some
unaccountable objection to having his throat cut, he remained where he
was, and growled more fiercely than before: at the same time grasping
the end of the poker between his teeth, and biting at it like a wild
beast.

This resistance only infuriated Mr. Sikes the more; who, dropping on
his knees, began to assail the animal most furiously. The dog jumped
from right to left, and from left to right; snapping, growling, and
barking; the man thrust and swore, and struck and blasphemed; and the
struggle was reaching a most critical point for one or other; when, the
door suddenly opening, the dog darted out: leaving Bill Sikes with the
poker and the clasp-knife in his hands.

There must always be two parties to a quarrel, says the old adage. Mr.
Sikes, being disappointed of the dog's participation, at once
transferred his share in the quarrel to the new comer.

"What the devil do you come in between me and my dog for?" said Sikes,
with a fierce gesture.

"Didn't know, you white-livered thief!" growled Sikes. "Couldn't you
hear the noise?"

"Oh no! You hear nothing, you don't," retorted Sikes with a fierce
sneer. "Sneaking in and out, so as nobody hears how you come or go! I
wish you had been the dog, Fagin, half a minute ago."

"Cause the government, as cares for the lives of such men as you, as
haven't half the pluck of curs, lets a man kill a dog how he likes,"
replied Sikes, shutting up the knife with a very expressive look;
"that's why."

"Grin away," said Sikes, replacing the poker, and surveying him with
savage contempt; "grin away. You'll never have the laugh at me,
though, unless it's behind a nightcap. I"ve got the upper hand over
you, Fagin; and, d--me, I'll keep it. There! If I go, you go; so take
care of me."

"Humph," said Sikes, as if he thought the interest lay rather more on
the Jew's side than on his. "Well, what have you got to say to me?"

"Yes, yes, Bill; give me time, give me time," replied the Jew,
soothingly. "Here it is! All safe!" As he spoke, he drew forth an
old cotton handkerchief from his breast; and untying a large knot in
one corner, produced a small brown-paper packet. Sikes, snatching it
from him, hastily opened it; and proceeded to count the sovereigns it
contained.

"This is all, is it?" inquired Sikes.

"You haven't opened the parcel and swallowed one or two as you come
along, have you?" inquired Sikes, suspiciously. "Don't put on an
injured look at the question; you"ve done it many a time. Jerk the
tinkler."

Bill Sikes merely pointed to the empty measure. The Jew, perfectly
understanding the hint, retired to fill it: previously exchanging a
remarkable look with Fagin, who raised his eyes for an instant, as if
in expectation of it, and shook his head in reply; so slightly that the
action would have been almost imperceptible to an observant third
person. It was lost upon Sikes, who was stooping at the moment to tie
the boot-lace which the dog had torn. Possibly, if he had observed the
brief interchange of signals, he might have thought that it boded no
good to him.

"Is anybody here, Barney?" inquired Fagin; speaking, now that that
Sikes was looking on, without raising his eyes from the ground.

"Nancy!" exclaimed Sikes. "Where? Strike me blind, if I don't honour
that "ere girl, for her native talents."

"Send her here," said Sikes, pouring out a glass of liquor. "Send her
here."

"You are on the scent, are you, Nancy?" inquired Sikes, proffering the
glass.

Now, whether a peculiar contraction of the Jew's red eye-brows, and a
half closing of his deeply-set eyes, warned Miss Nancy that she was
disposed to be too communicative, is not a matter of much importance.
The fact is all we need care for here; and the fact is, that she
suddenly checked herself, and with several gracious smiles upon Mr.
Sikes, turned the conversation to other matters. In about ten minutes"
time, Mr. Fagin was seized with a fit of coughing; upon which Nancy
pulled her shawl over her shoulders, and declared it was time to go.
Mr. Sikes, finding that he was walking a short part of her way himself,
expressed his intention of accompanying her; they went away together,
followed, at a little distant, by the dog, who slunk out of a back-yard
as soon as his master was out of sight.

The Jew thrust his head out of the room door when Sikes had left it;
looked after him as we walked up the dark passage; shook his clenched
fist; muttered a deep curse; and then, with a horrible grin, reseated
himself at the table; where he was soon deeply absorbed in the
interesting pages of the Hue-and-Cry.

The narrow streets and courts, at length, terminated in a large open
space; scattered about which, were pens for beasts, and other
indications of a cattle-market. Sikes slackened his pace when they
reached this spot: the girl being quite unable to support any longer,
the rapid rate at which they had hitherto walked. Turning to Oliver,
he roughly commanded him to take hold of Nancy's hand.

"Do you hear?" growled Sikes, as Oliver hesitated, and looked round.

"Give me the other," said Sikes, seizing Oliver's unoccupied hand.
"Here, Bull's-Eye!"

"See here, boy!" said Sikes, putting his other hand to Oliver's throat;
"if he speaks ever so soft a word, hold him! D'ye mind!"

"He's as willing as a Christian, strike me blind if he isn't!" said
Sikes, regarding the animal with a kind of grim and ferocious approval.
"Now, you know what you"ve got to expect, master, so call away as quick
as you like; the dog will soon stop that game. Get on, young"un!"

"What's the good of telling me that; I can hear it, can't I!" replied
Sikes.

"Of course they can," replied Sikes. "It was Bartlemy time when I was
shopped; and there warn't a penny trumpet in the fair, as I couldn't
hear the squeaking on. Arter I was locked up for the night, the row
and din outside made the thundering old jail so silent, that I could
almost have beat my brains out against the iron plates of the door."

"Yes; that's all you women think of," answered Sikes. "Fine young
chaps! Well, they're as good as dead, so it don't much matter."

With this consolation, Mr. Sikes appeared to repress a rising tendency
to jealousy, and, clasping Oliver's wrist more firmly, told him to step
out again.

"And what good would that do?" inquired the unsentimental Mr. Sikes.
"Unless you could pitch over a file and twenty yards of good stout
rope, you might as well be walking fifty mile off, or not walking at
all, for all the good it would do me. Come on, and don't stand
preaching there."

They walked on, by little-frequented and dirty ways, for a full
half-hour: meeting very few people, and those appearing from their
looks to hold much the same position in society as Mr. Sikes himself.
At length they turned into a very filthy narrow street, nearly full of
old-clothes shops; the dog running forward, as if conscious that there
was no further occasion for his keeping on guard, stopped before the
door of a shop that was closed and apparently untenanted; the house was
in a ruinous condition, and on the door was nailed a board, intimating
that it was to let: which looked as if it had hung there for many
years.

"All right," cried Sikes, glancing cautiously about.

Nancy stooped below the shutters, and Oliver heard the sound of a bell.
They crossed to the opposite side of the street, and stood for a few
moments under a lamp. A noise, as if a sash window were gently raised,
was heard; and soon afterwards the door softly opened. Mr. Sikes then
seized the terrified boy by the collar with very little ceremony; and
all three were quickly inside the house.

"Anybody here?" inquired Sikes.

"Let's have a glim," said Sikes, "or we shall go breaking our necks, or
treading on the dog. Look after your legs if you do!"

"Hallo, what's that?" inquired Sikes, stepping forward as the Jew
seized the note. "That's mine, Fagin."

"If that ain't mine!" said Bill Sikes, putting on his hat with a
determined air; "mine and Nancy's that is; I'll take the boy back
again."

"Come! Hand over, will you?" said Sikes.

"Fair, or not fair," retorted Sikes, "hand over, I tell you! Do you
think Nancy and me has got nothing else to do with our precious time
but to spend it in scouting arter, and kidnapping, every young boy as
gets grabbed through you? Give it here, you avaricious old skeleton,
give it here!"

With this gentle remonstrance, Mr. Sikes plucked the note from between
the Jew's finger and thumb; and looking the old man coolly in the face,
folded it up small, and tied it in his neckerchief.

"That's for our share of the trouble," said Sikes; "and not half
enough, neither. You may keep the books, if you're fond of reading.
If you ain't, sell "em."

"Of course it couldn't," replied Sikes; "I know'd that, directly I see
him coming through Clerkenwell, with the books under his arm. It's all
right enough. They're soft-hearted psalm-singers, or they wouldn't
have taken him in at all; and they'll ask no questions after him, fear
they should be obliged to prosecute, and so get him lagged. He's safe
enough."

Oliver had looked from one to the other, while these words were being
spoken, as if he were bewildered, and could scarecely understand what
passed; but when Bill Sikes concluded, he jumped suddenly to his feet,
and tore wildly from the room: uttering shrieks for help, which made
the bare old house echo to the roof.

"Serve him right!" cried Sikes, struggling to disengage himself from
the girl's grasp. "Stand off from me, or I'll split your head against
the wall."

"Shan't he!" said Sikes, setting his teeth. "I'll soon do that, if you
don't keep off."

"The girl's gone mad, I think," replied Sikes, savagely.

"Why, Nancy!" said the Jew, in a soothing tone; after a pause, during
which he and Mr. Sikes had stared at one another in a disconcerted
manner; "you,--you're more clever than ever to-night. Ha! ha! my dear,
you are acting beautifully."

There is something about a roused woman: especially if she add to all
her other strong passions, the fierce impulses of recklessness and
despair; which few men like to provoke. The Jew saw that it would be
hopeless to affect any further mistake regarding the reality of Miss
Nancy's rage; and, shrinking involuntarily back a few paces, cast a
glance, half imploring and half cowardly, at Sikes: as if to hint that
he was the fittest person to pursue the dialogue.

Mr. Sikes, thus mutely appealed to; and possibly feeling his personal
pride and influence interested in the immediate reduction of Miss Nancy
to reason; gave utterance to about a couple of score of curses and
threats, the rapid production of which reflected great credit on the
fertility of his invention. As they produced no visible effect on the
object against whom they were discharged, however, he resorted to more
tangible arguments.

"What do you mean by this?" said Sikes; backing the inquiry with a very
common imprecation concerning the most beautiful of human features:
which, if it were heard above, only once out of every fifty thousand
times that it is uttered below, would render blindness as common a
disorder as measles: "what do you mean by it? Burn my body! Do you
know who you are, and what you are?"

"Well, then, keep quiet," rejoined Sikes, with a growl like that he was
accustomed to use when addressing his dog, "or I'll quiet you for a
good long time to come."

The girl laughed again: even less composedly than before; and, darting
a hasty look at Sikes, turned her face aside, and bit her lip till the
blood came.

"You're a nice one," added Sikes, as he surveyed her with a
contemptuous air, "to take up the humane and gen--teel side! A pretty
subject for the child, as you call him, to make a friend of!"

"Come, come, Sikes," said the Jew appealing to him in a remonstratory
tone, and motioning towards the boys, who were eagerly attentive to all
that passed; "we must have civil words; civil words, Bill."

The girl said nothing more; but, tearing her hair and dress in a
transport of passion, made such a rush at the Jew as would probably
have left signal marks of her revenge upon him, had not her wrists been
seized by Sikes at the right moment; upon which, she made a few
ineffectual struggles, and fainted.

"She's all right now," said Sikes, laying her down in a corner. "She's
uncommon strong in the arms, when she's up in this way."

The Jew wiped his forehead: and smiled, as if it were a relief to have
the disturbance over; but neither he, nor Sikes, nor the dog, nor the
boys, seemed to consider it in any other light than a common occurance
incidental to business.

Little Oliver's blood ran cold, as he listened to the Jew's words, and
imperfectly comprehended the dark threats conveyed in them. That it
was possible even for justice itself to confound the innocent with the
guilty when they were in accidental companionship, he knew already; and
that deeply-laid plans for the destruction of inconveniently knowing or
over-communicative persons, had been really devised and carried out by
the Jew on more occasions than one, he thought by no means unlikely,
when he recollected the general nature of the altercations between that
gentleman and Mr. Sikes: which seemed to bear reference to some
foregone conspiracy of the kind. As he glanced timidly up, and met the
Jew's searching look, he felt that his pale face and trembling limbs
were neither unnoticed nor unrelished by that wary old gentleman.

"I am," repeated the Dodger. "So's Charley. So's Fagin. So's Sikes.
So's Nancy. So's Bet. So we all are, down to the dog. And he's the
downiest one of the lot!"

This was merely intended as a tribute to the animal's abilities, but it
was an appropriate remark in another sense, if Master Bates had only
known it; for there are a good many ladies and gentlemen, claiming to
be out-and-out Christians, between whom, and Mr. Sikes" dog, there
exist strong and singular points of resemblance.

"Bring in your body then," said Sikes. "Lie down, you stupid brute!
Don't you know the devil when he's got a great-coat on?"

"Well!" said Sikes.

"It must be a piercer, if it finds its way through your heart," said
Mr. Sikes. "Give him something to drink, Nancy. Burn my body, make
haste! It's enough to turn a man ill, to see his lean old carcase
shivering in that way, like a ugly ghost just rose from the grave."

Nancy quickly brought a bottle from a cupboard, in which there were
many: which, to judge from the diversity of their appearance, were
filled with several kinds of liquids. Sikes pouring out a glass of
brandy, bade the Jew drink it off.

"What! You're afraid of our getting the better of you, are you?"
inquired Sikes, fixing his eyes on the Jew. "Ugh!"

With a hoarse grunt of contempt, Mr. Sikes seized the glass, and threw
the remainder of its contents into the ashes: as a preparatory ceremony
to filling it again for himself: which he did at once.

"There," said Sikes, smacking his lips. "Now I"m ready."

"For business," replied Sikes; "so say what you"ve got to say."

"Yes. Wot about it?" inquired Sikes.

"No, he don't," sneered Mr. Sikes. "Or he won't, and that's the same
thing. Speak out, and call things by their right names; don't sit
there, winking and blinking, and talking to me in hints, as if you
warn't the very first that thought about the robbery. Wot d'ye mean?"

"Let "em hear!" said Sikes; "I don't care." But as Mr. Sikes DID care,
on reflection, he dropped his voice as he said the words, and grew
calmer.

"Not at all," replied Sikes coldly.

"No, not at all," rejoined Sikes. "At least it can't be a put-up job,
as we expected."

"But I will tell you," retorted Sikes. "Who are you that's not to be
told? I tell you that Toby Crackit has been hanging about the place
for a fortnight, and he can't get one of the servants in line."

"Yes, I do mean to tell you so," replied Sikes. "The old lady has had
"em these twenty years; and if you were to give "em five hundred pound,
they wouldn't be in it."

"Not a bit of it," replied Sikes.

"No; not even by flash Toby Crackit," replied Sikes. "He says he's
worn sham whiskers, and a canary waistcoat, the whole blessed time he's
been loitering down there, and it's all of no use."

"So he did," rejoined Sikes, "and they warn't of no more use than the
other plant."

"So it is," said Mr. Sikes. "Worse luck!"

A long silence ensued; during which the Jew was plunged in deep
thought, with his face wrinkled into an expression of villainy
perfectly demoniacal. Sikes eyed him furtively from time to time.
Nancy, apparently fearful of irritating the housebreaker, sat with her
eyes fixed upon the fire, as if she had been deaf to all that passed.

"Fagin," said Sikes, abruptly breaking the stillness that prevailed;
"is it worth fifty shiners extra, if it's safely done from the outside?"

"Is it a bargain?" inquired Sikes.

"Then," said Sikes, thrusting aside the Jew's hand, with some disdain,
"let it come off as soon as you like. Toby and me were over the
garden-wall the night afore last, sounding the panels of the door and
shutters. The crib's barred up at night like a jail; but there's one
part we can crack, safe and softly."

"Why," whispered Sikes, "as you cross the lawn--"

"Umph!" cried Sikes, stopping short, as the girl, scarcely moving her
head, looked suddenly round, and pointed for an instant to the Jew's
face. "Never mind which part it is. You can't do it without me, I
know; but it's best to be on the safe side when one deals with you."

"None," said Sikes. "Cept a centre-bit and a boy. The first we"ve
both got; the second you must find us."

"Never mind wot it is!" replied Sikes. "I want a boy, and he musn't be
a big "un. Lord!" said Mr. Sikes, reflectively, "if I'd only got that
young boy of Ned, the chimbley-sweeper's! He kept him small on
purpose, and let him out by the job. But the father gets lagged; and
then the Juvenile Delinquent Society comes, and takes the boy away from
a trade where he was earning money, teaches him to read and write, and
in time makes a "prentice of him. And so they go on," said Mr. Sikes,
his wrath rising with the recollection of his wrongs, "so they go on;
and, if they'd got money enough (which it's a Providence they haven't,)
we shouldn't have half a dozen boys left in the whole trade, in a year
or two."

"What now?" inquired Sikes.

The Jew nodded his head towards Nancy, who was still gazing at the
fire; and intimated, by a sign, that he would have her told to leave
the room. Sikes shrugged his shoulders impatiently, as if he thought
the precaution unnecessary; but complied, nevertheless, by requesting
Miss Nancy to fetch him a jug of beer.

"I tell you I do!" replied Sikes.

The Jew still hesitated. Sikes looked from one to the other in some
surprise.

"But wot?" inquired Sikes.

At this confession, Miss Nancy burst into a loud laugh; and, swallowing
a glass of brandy, shook her head with an air of defiance, and burst
into sundry exclamations of "Keep the game a-going!" "Never say die!"
and the like. These seemed to have the effect of re-assuring both
gentlemen; for the Jew nodded his head with a satisfied air, and
resumed his seat: as did Mr. Sikes likewise.

"What about him?" demanded Sikes.

"He!" exclaimed. Sikes.

"Well, he is just the size I want," said Mr. Sikes, ruminating.

"Frighten him!" echoed Sikes. "It'll be no sham frightening, mind you.
If there's anything queer about him when we once get into the work; in
for a penny, in for a pound. You won't see him alive again, Fagin.
Think of that, before you send him. Mark my words!" said the robber,
poising a crowbar, which he had drawn from under the bedstead.

"Ours!" said Sikes. "Yours, you mean."

"And wot," said Sikes, scowling fiercely on his agreeable friend, "wot
makes you take so much pains about one chalk-faced kid, when you know
there are fifty boys snoozing about Common Garden every night, as you
might pick and choose from?"

"When is it to be done?" asked Nancy, stopping some turbulent
exclamation on the part of Mr. Sikes, expressive of the disgust with
which he received Fagin's affectation of humanity.

"I planned with Toby, the night arter to-morrow," rejoined Sikes in a
surly voice, "if he heerd nothing from me to the contrairy."

"No," rejoined Sikes.

Sikes nodded.

"Oh, ah, it's all planned," rejoined Sikes, interrupting him. "Never
mind particulars. You'd better bring the boy here to-morrow night. I
shall get off the stone an hour arter daybreak. Then you hold your
tongue, and keep the melting-pot ready, and that's all you'll have to
do."

After some discussion, in which all three took an active part, it was
decided that Nancy should repair to the Jew's next evening when the
night had set in, and bring Oliver away with her; Fagin craftily
observing, that, if he evinced any disinclination to the task, he would
be more willing to accompany the girl who had so recently interfered in
his behalf, than anybody else. It was also solemnly arranged that poor
Oliver should, for the purposes of the contemplated expedition, be
unreservedly consigned to the care and custody of Mr. William Sikes;
and further, that the said Sikes should deal with him as he thought
fit; and should not be held responsible by the Jew for any mischance or
evil that might be necessary to visit him: it being understood that, to
render the compact in this respect binding, any representations made by
Mr. Sikes on his return should be required to be confirmed and
corroborated, in all important particulars, by the testimony of flash
Toby Crackit.

These preliminaries adjusted, Mr. Sikes proceeded to drink brandy at a
furious rate, and to flourish the crowbar in an alarming manner;
yelling forth, at the same time, most unmusical snatches of song,
mingled with wild execrations. At length, in a fit of professional
enthusiasm, he insisted upon producing his box of housebreaking tools:
which he had no sooner stumbled in with, and opened for the purpose of
explaining the nature and properties of the various implements it
contained, and the peculiar beauties of their construction, than he
fell over the box upon the floor, and went to sleep where he fell.

The Jew again bade her good-night, and, bestowing a sly kick upon the
prostrate form of Mr. Sikes while her back was turned, groped
downstairs.

When Oliver awoke in the morning, he was a good deal surprised to find
that a new pair of shoes, with strong thick soles, had been placed at
his bedside; and that his old shoes had been removed. At first, he was
pleased with the discovery: hoping that it might be the forerunner of
his release; but such thoughts were quickly dispelled, on his sitting
down to breakfast along with the Jew, who told him, in a tone and
manner which increased his alarm, that he was to be taken to the
residence of Bill Sikes that night.

He could think of no bad object to be attained by sending him to Sikes,
which would not be equally well answered by his remaining with Fagin;
and after meditating for a long time, concluded that he had been
selected to perform some ordinary menial offices for the housebreaker,
until another boy, better suited for his purpose could be engaged. He
was too well accustomed to suffering, and had suffered too much where
he was, to bewail the prospect of change very severely. He remained
lost in thought for some minutes; and then, with a heavy sigh, snuffed
the candle, and, taking up the book which the Jew had left with him,
began to read.

"Hallo!" replied Sikes: appearing at the head of the stairs, with a
candle. "Oh! That's the time of day. Come on!"

This was a very strong expression of approbation, an uncommonly hearty
welcome, from a person of Mr. Sikes" temperament. Nancy, appearing
much gratified thereby, saluted him cordially.

"Bull's-eye's gone home with Tom," observed Sikes, as he lighted them
up. "He'd have been in the way."

"So you"ve got the kid," said Sikes when they had all reached the room:
closing the door as he spoke.

"Did he come quiet?" inquired Sikes.

"I"m glad to hear it," said Sikes, looking grimly at Oliver; "for the
sake of his young carcase: as would otherways have suffered for it.
Come here, young "un; and let me read you a lectur", which is as well
got over at once."

Thus addressing his new pupil, Mr. Sikes pulled off Oliver's cap and
threw it into a corner; and then, taking him by the shoulder, sat
himself down by the table, and stood the boy in front of him.

"Now, first: do you know wot this is?" inquired Sikes, taking up a
pocket-pistol which lay on the table.

"Well, then, look here," continued Sikes. "This is powder; that "ere's
a bullet; and this is a little bit of a old hat for waddin"."

Oliver murmured his comprehension of the different bodies referred to;
and Mr. Sikes proceeded to load the pistol, with great nicety and
deliberation.

"Now it's loaded," said Mr. Sikes, when he had finished.

Having bestowed a scowl upon the object of this warning, to increase
its effect, Mr. Sikes continued.

"That's it!" observed Mr. Sikes, approvingly; "women can always put
things in fewest words.--Except when it's blowing up; and then they
lengthens it out. And now that he's thoroughly up to it, let's have
some supper, and get a snooze before starting."

In pursuance of this request, Nancy quickly laid the cloth;
disappearing for a few minutes, she presently returned with a pot of
porter and a dish of sheep's heads: which gave occasion to several
pleasant witticisms on the part of Mr. Sikes, founded upon the singular
coincidence of "jemmies" being a can name, common to them, and also to
an ingenious implement much used in his profession. Indeed, the worthy
gentleman, stimulated perhaps by the immediate prospect of being on
active service, was in great spirits and good humour; in proof whereof,
it may be here remarked, that he humourously drank all the beer at a
draught, and did not utter, on a rough calculation, more than
four-score oaths during the whole progress of the meal.

Supper being ended--it may be easily conceived that Oliver had no great
appetite for it--Mr. Sikes disposed of a couple of glasses of spirits
and water, and threw himself on the bed; ordering Nancy, with many
imprecations in case of failure, to call him at five precisely. Oliver
stretched himself in his clothes, by command of the same authority, on
a mattress upon the floor; and the girl, mending the fire, sat before
it, in readiness to rouse them at the appointed time.

When he awoke, the table was covered with tea-things, and Sikes was
thrusting various articles into the pockets of his great-coat, which
hung over the back of a chair. Nancy was busily engaged in preparing
breakfast. It was not yet daylight; for the candle was still burning,
and it was quite dark outside. A sharp rain, too, was beating against
the window-panes; and the sky looked black and cloudy.

"Now, then!" growled Sikes, as Oliver started up; "half-past five!
Look sharp, or you'll get no breakfast; for it's late as it is."

Oliver was not long in making his toilet; having taken some breakfast,
he replied to a surly inquiry from Sikes, by saying that he was quite
ready.

Nancy, scarcely looking at the boy, threw him a handkerchief to tie
round his throat; Sikes gave him a large rough cape to button over his
shoulders. Thus attired, he gave his hand to the robber, who, merely
pausing to show him with a menacing gesture that he had that same
pistol in a side-pocket of his great-coat, clasped it firmly in his,
and, exchanging a farewell with Nancy, led him away.

Turning down Sun Street and Crown Street, and crossing Finsbury square,
Mr. Sikes struck, by way of Chiswell Street, into Barbican: thence into
Long Lane, and so into Smithfield; from which latter place arose a
tumult of discordant sounds that filled Oliver Twist with amazement.

Mr. Sikes, dragging Oliver after him, elbowed his way through the
thickest of the crowd, and bestowed very little attention on the
numerous sights and sounds, which so astonished the boy. He nodded,
twice or thrice, to a passing friend; and, resisting as many
invitations to take a morning dram, pressed steadily onward, until they
were clear of the turmoil, and had made their way through Hosier Lane
into Holborn.

"Now, young "un!" said Sikes, looking up at the clock of St. Andrew's
Church, "hard upon seven! you must step out. Come, don't lag behind
already, Lazy-legs!"

Mr. Sikes accompanied this speech with a jerk at his little companion's
wrist; Oliver, quickening his pace into a kind of trot between a fast
walk and a run, kept up with the rapid strides of the house-breaker as
well as he could.

They held their course at this rate, until they had passed Hyde Park
corner, and were on their way to Kensington: when Sikes relaxed his
pace, until an empty cart which was at some little distance behind,
came up. Seeing "Hounslow" written on it, he asked the driver with as
much civility as he could assume, if he would give them a lift as far
as Isleworth.

"Yes; he's my boy," replied Sikes, looking hard at Oliver, and putting
his hand abstractedly into the pocket where the pistol was.

"Not a bit of it," replied Sikes, interposing. "He's used to it.

Sikes dismounted with great precipitation, holding Oliver by the hand
all the while; and lifting him down directly, bestowed a furious look
upon him, and rapped the side-pocket with his fist, in a significant
manner.

"He's sulky," replied Sikes, giving him a shake; "he's sulky. A young
dog! Don't mind him."

Sikes waited until he had fairly gone; and then, telling Oliver he
might look about him if he wanted, once again led him onward on his
journey.

The kitchen was an old, low-roofed room; with a great beam across the
middle of the ceiling, and benches, with high backs to them, by the
fire; on which were seated several rough men in smock-frocks, drinking
and smoking. They took no notice of Oliver; and very little of Sikes;
and, as Sikes took very little notice of them, he and his young comrade
sat in a corner by themselves, without being much troubled by their
company.

They had some cold meat for dinner, and sat so long after it, while Mr.
Sikes indulged himself with three or four pipes, that Oliver began to
feel quite certain they were not going any further. Being much tired
with the walk, and getting up so early, he dozed a little at first;
then, quite overpowered by fatigue and the fumes of the tobacco, fell
asleep.

It was quite dark when he was awakened by a push from Sikes. Rousing
himself sufficiently to sit up and look about him, he found that worthy
in close fellowship and communication with a labouring man, over a pint
of ale.

"So, you're going on to Lower Halliford, are you?" inquired Sikes.

"Could you give my boy and me a lift as far as there?" demanded Sikes,
pushing the ale towards his new friend.

"Going on to Shepperton," replied Sikes.

"Why not?" rejoined Sikes. "You're a-going to accommodate us, and
wot's to prevent my standing treat for a pint or so, in return?"

The stranger reflected upon this argument, with a very profound face;
having done so, he seized Sikes by the hand: and declared he was a
real good fellow. To which Mr. Sikes replied, he was joking; as, if he
had been sober, there would have been strong reason to suppose he was.

The horse, whose health had been drunk in his absence, was standing
outside: ready harnessed to the cart. Oliver and Sikes got in without
any further ceremony; and the man to whom he belonged, having lingered
for a minute or two "to bear him up," and to defy the hostler and the
world to produce his equal, mounted also. Then, the hostler was told
to give the horse his head; and, his head being given him, he made a
very unpleasant use of it: tossing it into the air with great disdain,
and running into the parlour windows over the way; after performing
those feats, and supporting himself for a short time on his hind-legs,
he started off at great speed, and rattled out of the town right
gallantly.

The night was very dark. A damp mist rose from the river, and the
marshy ground about; and spread itself over the dreary fields. It was
piercing cold, too; all was gloomy and black. Not a word was spoken;
for the driver had grown sleepy; and Sikes was in no mood to lead him
into conversation. Oliver sat huddled together, in a corner of the
cart; bewildered with alarm and apprehension; and figuring strange
objects in the gaunt trees, whose branches waved grimly to and fro, as
if in some fantastic joy at the desolation of the scene.

Sunbury was passed through, and they came again into the lonely road.
Two or three miles more, and the cart stopped. Sikes alighted, took
Oliver by the hand, and they once again walked on.

Sikes kept straight on, until they were close upon the bridge; then
turned suddenly down a bank upon the left.

Sikes, with Oliver's hand still in his, softly approached the low
porch, and raised the latch. The door yielded to the pressure, and
they passed in together.

"Don't make such a row," said Sikes, bolting the door. "Show a glim,
Toby."

"Do you hear?" cried the same voice. "There's Bill Sikes in the
passage with nobody to do the civil to him; and you sleeping there, as
if you took laudanum with your meals, and nothing stronger. Are you
any fresher now, or do you want the iron candlestick to wake you
thoroughly?"

"Bister Sikes!" exclaimed Barney, with real or counterfeit joy; "cub
id, sir; cub id."

"Here! you get on first," said Sikes, putting Oliver in front of him.
"Quicker! or I shall tread upon your heels."

Muttering a curse upon his tardiness, Sikes pushed Oliver before him;
and they entered a low dark room with a smoky fire, two or three broken
chairs, a table, and a very old couch: on which, with his legs much
higher than his head, a man was reposing at full length, smoking a long
clay pipe. He was dressed in a smartly-cut snuff-coloured coat, with
large brass buttons; an orange neckerchief; a coarse, staring,
shawl-pattern waistcoat; and drab breeches. Mr. Crackit (for he it
was) had no very great quantity of hair, either upon his head or face;
but what he had, was of a reddish dye, and tortured into long corkscrew
curls, through which he occasionally thrust some very dirty fingers,
ornamented with large common rings. He was a trifle above the middle
size, and apparently rather weak in the legs; but this circumstance by
no means detracted from his own admiration of his top-boots, which he
contemplated, in their elevated situation, with lively satisfaction.

"The boy. Only the boy!" replied Sikes, drawing a chair towards the
fire.

"There--there's enough of that," interposed Sikes, impatiently; and
stooping over his recumbant friend, he whispered a few words in his
ear: at which Mr. Crackit laughed immensely, and honoured Oliver with
a long stare of astonishment.

"Now," said Sikes, as he resumed his seat, "if you'll give us something
to eat and drink while we're waiting, you'll put some heart in us; or
in me, at all events. Sit down by the fire, younker, and rest
yourself; for you'll have to go out with us again to-night, though not
very far off."

Oliver looked at Sikes, in mute and timid wonder; and drawing a stool
to the fire, sat with his aching head upon his hands, scarecely knowing
where he was, or what was passing around him.

"Here," said Toby, as the young Jew placed some fragments of food, and
a bottle upon the table, "Success to the crack!" He rose to honour
the toast; and, carefully depositing his empty pipe in a corner,
advanced to the table, filled a glass with spirits, and drank off its
contents. Mr. Sikes did the same.

"He had better!" said Sikes clapping his hand upon his pocket. "Burn my
body, if he isn't more trouble than a whole family of Dodgers. Drink
it, you perwerse imp; drink it!"

Frightened by the menacing gestures of the two men, Oliver hastily
swallowed the contents of the glass, and immediately fell into a
violent fit of coughing: which delighted Toby Crackit and Barney, and
even drew a smile from the surly Mr. Sikes.

This done, and Sikes having satisfied his appetite (Oliver could eat
nothing but a small crust of bread which they made him swallow), the
two men laid themselves down on chairs for a short nap. Oliver
retained his stool by the fire; Barney wrapped in a blanket, stretched
himself on the floor: close outside the fender.

In an instant, the other two were on their legs, and all were actively
engaged in busy preparation. Sikes and his companion enveloped their
necks and chins in large dark shawls, and drew on their great-coats;
Barney, opening a cupboard, brought forth several articles, which he
hastily crammed into the pockets.

"I"ve got "em," replied Sikes.

"Now then!" said Sikes, holding out his hand.

Oliver: who was completely stupified by the unwonted exercise, and the
air, and the drink which had been forced upon him: put his hand
mechanically into that which Sikes extended for the purpose.

"Take his other hand, Toby," said Sikes. "Look out, Barney."

"Slap through the town," whispered Sikes; "there'll be nobody in the
way, to-night, to see us."

Before Oliver had time to look round, Sikes had caught him under the
arms; and in three or four seconds he and Toby were lying on the grass
on the other side. Sikes followed directly. And they stole cautiously
towards the house.

"Get up!" murmured Sikes, trembling with rage, and drawing the pistol
from his pocket; "Get up, or I'll strew your brains upon the grass."

Sikes, invoking terrific imprecations upon Fagin's head for sending
Oliver on such an errand, plied the crowbar vigorously, but with little
noise. After some delay, and some assistance from Toby, the shutter to
which he had referred, swung open on its hinges.

"Now listen, you young limb," whispered Sikes, drawing a dark lantern
from his pocket, and throwing the glare full on Oliver's face; "I"m a
going to put you through there. Take this light; go softly up the
steps straight afore you, and along the little hall, to the street
door; unfasten it, and let us in."

"Keep quiet, can't you?" replied Sikes, with a threatening look. "The
room-door is open, is it?"

Although Mr. Crackit spoke in a scarcely audible whisper, and laughed
without noise, Sikes imperiously commanded him to be silent, and to get
to work. Toby complied, by first producing his lantern, and placing it
on the ground; then by planting himself firmly with his head against
the wall beneath the window, and his hands upon his knees, so as to
make a step of his back. This was no sooner done, than Sikes, mounting
upon him, put Oliver gently through the window with his feet first;
and, without leaving hold of his collar, planted him safely on the
floor inside.

"Take this lantern," said Sikes, looking into the room. "You see the
stairs afore you?"

Oliver, more dead than alive, gasped out, "Yes." Sikes, pointing to
the street-door with the pistol-barrel, briefly advised him to take
notice that he was within shot all the way; and that if he faltered, he
would fall dead that instant.

"It's done in a minute," said Sikes, in the same low whisper. "Directly
I leave go of you, do your work. Hark!"

"Nothing," said Sikes, releasing his hold of Oliver. "Now!"

"Come back!" suddenly cried Sikes aloud. "Back! back!"

Sikes had disappeared for an instant; but he was up again, and had him
by the collar before the smoke had cleared away. He fired his own
pistol after the men, who were already retreating; and dragged the boy
up.

"Clasp your arm tighter," said Sikes, as he drew him through the
window. "Give me a shawl here. They"ve hit him. Quick! How the boy
bleeds!"

"Mean!" cried the Jew, stamping furiously on the ground. "Where are
they? Sikes and the boy! Where are they? Where have they been?
Where are they hiding? Why have they not been here?"

"Sikes is not, I suppose?" inquired the Jew, with a disappointed
countenance.

The Three Cripples, or rather the Cripples; which was the sign by which
the establishment was familiarly known to its patrons: was the
public-house in which Mr. Sikes and his dog have already figured.
Merely making a sign to a man at the bar, Fagin walked straight
upstairs, and opening the door of a room, and softly insinuating
himself into the chamber, looked anxiously about: shading his eyes with
his hand, as if in search of some particular person.

The landlord reciprocated the old man's laugh; and returned to his
guests. The Jew was no sooner alone, than his countenance resumed its
former expression of anxiety and thought. After a brief reflection, he
called a hack-cabriolet, and bade the man drive towards Bethnal Green.
He dismissed him within some quarter of a mile of Mr. Sikes's
residence, and performed the short remainder of the distance, on foot.

During the silence, the Jew looked restlessly about the room, as if to
assure himself that there were no appearances of Sikes having covertly
returned. Apparently satisfied with his inspection, he coughed twice
or thrice, and made as many efforts to open a conversation; but the
girl heeded him no more than if he had been made of stone. At length
he made another attempt; and rubbing his hands together, said, in his
most conciliatory tone,

"Change it!" exclaimed the Jew, exasperated beyond all bounds by his
companion's unexpected obstinacy, and the vexation of the night, "I
_will_ change it! Listen to me, you drab. Listen to me, who with six
words, can strangle Sikes as surely as if I had his bull's throat
between my fingers now. If he comes back, and leaves the boy behind
him; if he gets off free, and dead or alive, fails to restore him to
me; murder him yourself if you would have him escape Jack Ketch. And
do it the moment he sets foot in this room, or mind me, it will be too
late!"

Having eased his mind by this discovery; and having accomplished his
twofold object of imparting to the girl what he had, that night, heard,
and of ascertaining, with his own eyes, that Sikes had not returned,
Mr. Fagin again turned his face homeward: leaving his young friend
asleep, with her head upon the table.

"Wolves tear your throats!" muttered Sikes, grinding his teeth. "I wish
I was among some of you; you'd howl the hoarser for it."

As Sikes growled forth this imprecation, with the most desperate
ferocity that his desperate nature was capable of, he rested the body
of the wounded boy across his bended knee; and turned his head, for an
instant, to look back at his pursuers.

The repetition of the word, brought Toby to a dead stand-still. For he
was not quite satisfied that he was beyond the range of pistol-shot;
and Sikes was in no mood to be played with.

"Bear a hand with the boy," cried Sikes, beckoning furiously to his
confederate. "Come back!"

"Quicker!" cried Sikes, laying the boy in a dry ditch at his feet, and
drawing a pistol from his pocket. "Don't play booty with me."

At this moment the noise grew louder. Sikes, again looking round,
could discern that the men who had given chase were already climbing
the gate of the field in which he stood; and that a couple of dogs were
some paces in advance of them.

"It's all up, Bill!" cried Toby; "drop the kid, and show "em your
heels." With this parting advice, Mr. Crackit, preferring the chance
of being shot by his friend, to the certainty of being taken by his
enemies, fairly turned tail, and darted off at full speed. Sikes
clenched his teeth; took one look around; threw over the prostrate form
of Oliver, the cape in which he had been hurriedly muffled; ran along
the front of the hedge, as if to distract the attention of those
behind, from the spot where the boy lay; paused, for a second, before
another hedge which met it at right angles; and whirling his pistol
high into the air, cleared it at a bound, and was gone.

The air grew colder, as day came slowly on; and the mist rolled along
the ground like a dense cloud of smoke. The grass was wet; the
pathways, and low places, were all mire and water; the damp breath of
an unwholesome wind went languidly by, with a hollow moaning. Still,
Oliver lay motionless and insensible on the spot where Sikes had left
him.

And now, hosts of bewildering and confused ideas came crowding on his
mind. He seemed to be still walking between Sikes and Crackit, who
were angrily disputing--for the very words they said, sounded in his
ears; and when he caught his own attention, as it were, by making some
violent effort to save himself from falling, he found that he was
talking to them. Then, he was alone with Sikes, plodding on as on the
previous day; and as shadowy people passed them, he felt the robber's
grasp upon his wrist. Suddenly, he started back at the report of
firearms; there rose into the air, loud cries and shouts; lights
gleamed before his eyes; all was noise and tumult, as some unseen hand
bore him hurriedly away. Through all these rapid visions, there ran an
undefined, uneasy consciousness of pain, which wearied and tormented
him incessantly.

"Where's--confound the fellow, what's his rascally name--Sikes; that's
it. Where's Sikes, you thief?"

On the evening following that upon which the three worthies mentioned
in the last chapter, disposed of their little matter of business as
therein narrated, Mr. William Sikes, awakening from a nap, drowsily
growled forth an inquiry what time of night it was.

The room in which Mr. Sikes propounded this question, was not one of
those he had tenanted, previous to the Chertsey expedition, although it
was in the same quarter of the town, and was situated at no great
distance from his former lodgings. It was not, in appearance, so
desirable a habitation as his old quarters: being a mean and
badly-furnished apartment, of very limited size; lighted only by one
small window in the shelving roof, and abutting on a close and dirty
lane. Nor were there wanting other indications of the good gentleman's
having gone down in the world of late: for a great scarcity of
furniture, and total absence of comfort, together with the
disappearance of all such small moveables as spare clothes and linen,
bespoke a state of extreme poverty; while the meagre and attenuated
condition of Mr. Sikes himself would have fully confirmed these
symptoms, if they had stood in any need of corroboration.

The housebreaker was lying on the bed, wrapped in his white great-coat,
by way of dressing-gown, and displaying a set of features in no degree
improved by the cadaverous hue of illness, and the addition of a soiled
nightcap, and a stiff, black beard of a week's growth. The dog sat at
the bedside: now eyeing his master with a wistful look, and now
pricking his ears, and uttering a low growl as some noise in the
street, or in the lower part of the house, attracted his attention.
Seated by the window, busily engaged in patching an old waistcoat which
formed a portion of the robber's ordinary dress, was a female: so pale
and reduced with watching and privation, that there would have been
considerable difficulty in recognising her as the same Nancy who has
already figured in this tale, but for the voice in which she replied to
Mr. Sikes's question.

"As weak as water," replied Mr. Sikes, with an imprecation on his eyes
and limbs. "Here; lend us a hand, and let me get off this thundering
bed anyhow."

Illness had not improved Mr. Sikes's temper; for, as the girl raised
him up and led him to a chair, he muttered various curses on her
awkwardness, and struck her.

"Whining are you?" said Sikes. "Come! Don't stand snivelling there.
If you can't do anything better than that, cut off altogether. D'ye
hear me?"

"Oh! you"ve thought better of it, have you?" growled Sikes, marking the
tear which trembled in her eye. "All the better for you, you have."

"No!" cried Mr. Sikes. "Why not?"

"Well, then," rejoined Mr. Sikes, "I wouldn't. Why, damme, now, the
girls's whining again!"

"What'll be over?" demanded Mr. Sikes in a savage voice. "What foolery
are you up to, now, again? Get up and bustle about, and don't come
over me with your woman's nonsense."

At any other time, this remonstrance, and the tone in which it was
delivered, would have had the desired effect; but the girl being really
weak and exhausted, dropped her head over the back of the chair, and
fainted, before Mr. Sikes could get out a few of the appropriate oaths
with which, on similar occasions, he was accustomed to garnish his
threats. Not knowing, very well, what to do, in this uncommon
emergency; for Miss Nancy's hysterics were usually of that violent kind
which the patient fights and struggles out of, without much assistance;
Mr. Sikes tried a little blasphemy: and finding that mode of treatment
wholly ineffectual, called for assistance.

"Lend a hand to the girl, can't you?" replied Sikes impatiently. "Don't
stand chattering and grinning at me!"

These united restoratives, administered with great energy: especially
that department consigned to Master Bates, who appeared to consider his
share in the proceedings, a piece of unexampled pleasantry: were not
long in producing the desired effect. The girl gradually recovered her
senses; and, staggering to a chair by the bedside, hid her face upon
the pillow: leaving Mr. Sikes to confront the new comers, in some
astonishment at their unlooked-for appearance.

"Do!" exclaimed Mr. Sikes; "I might have been done for, twenty times
over, afore you'd have done anything to help me. What do you mean by
leaving a man in this state, three weeks and more, you false-hearted
wagabond?"

"The things is well enough in their way," observed Mr. Sikes: a little
soothed as he glanced over the table; "but what have you got to say for
yourself, why you should leave me here, down in the mouth, health,
blunt, and everything else; and take no more notice of me, all this
mortal time, than if I was that "ere dog.--Drive him down, Charley!"

"Hold your din," cried Sikes, as the dog retreated under the bed: still
growling angrily. "What have you got to say for yourself, you withered
old fence, eh?"

"And what about the other fortnight?" demanded Sikes. "What about the
other fortnight that you"ve left me lying here, like a sick rat in his
hole?"

"Upon your what?" growled Sikes, with excessive disgust. "Here! Cut me
off a piece of that pie, one of you boys, to take the taste of that out
of my mouth, or it'll choke me dead."

"No! I'll pound it that you han't," replied Sikes, with a bitter grin.
"You"ve been scheming and plotting away, every hour that I have laid
shivering and burning here; and Bill was to do this; and Bill was to do
that; and Bill was to do it all, dirt cheap, as soon as he got well:
and was quite poor enough for your work. If it hadn't been for the
girl, I might have died."

Nancy's appearance gave a new turn to the conversation; for the boys,
receiving a sly wink from the wary old Jew, began to ply her with
liquor: of which, however, she took very sparingly; while Fagin,
assuming an unusual flow of spirits, gradually brought Mr. Sikes into a
better temper, by affecting to regard his threats as a little pleasant
banter; and, moreover, by laughing very heartily at one or two rough
jokes, which, after repeated applications to the spirit-bottle, he
condescended to make.

"It's all very well," said Mr. Sikes; "but I must have some blunt from
you to-night."

"Then you"ve got lots at home," retorted Sikes; "and I must have some
from there."

"I don't know how much you"ve got, and I dare say you hardly know
yourself, as it would take a pretty long time to count it," said Sikes;
"but I must have some to-night; and that's flat."

"You won't do nothing of the kind," rejoined Mr. Sikes. "The Artful's a
deal too artful, and would forget to come, or lose his way, or get
dodged by traps and so be perwented, or anything for an excuse, if you
put him up to it. Nancy shall go to the ken and fetch it, to make all
sure; and I'll lie down and have a snooze while she's gone."

After a great deal of haggling and squabbling, Fagin beat down the
amount of the required advance from five pounds to three pounds four
and sixpence: protesting with many solemn asseverations that that would
only leave him eighteen-pence to keep house with; Mr. Sikes sullenly
remarking that if he couldn't get any more he must accompany him home;
with the Dodger and Master Bates put the eatables in the cupboard. The
Jew then, taking leave of his affectionate friend, returned homeward,
attended by Nancy and the boys: Mr. Sikes, meanwhile, flinging himself
on the bed, and composing himself to sleep away the time until the
young lady's return.

In due course, they arrived at Fagin's abode, where they found Toby
Crackit and Mr. Chitling intent upon their fifteenth game at cribbage,
which it is scarcely necessary to say the latter gentleman lost, and
with it, his fifteenth and last sixpence: much to the amusement of his
young friends. Mr. Crackit, apparently somewhat ashamed at being found
relaxing himself with a gentleman so much his inferior in station and
mental endowments, yawned, and inquiring after Sikes, took up his hat
to go.

When the girl got into the open street, she sat down upon a doorstep;
and seemed, for a few moments, wholly bewildered and unable to pursue
her way. Suddenly she arose; and hurrying on, in a direction quite
opposite to that in which Sikes was awaiting her returned, quickened
her pace, until it gradually resolved into a violent run. After
completely exhausting herself, she stopped to take breath: and, as if
suddenly recollecting herself, and deploring her inability to do
something she was bent upon, wrung her hands, and burst into tears.

If she betrayed any agitation, when she presented herself to Mr. Sikes,
he did not observe it; for merely inquiring if she had brought the
money, and receiving a reply in the affirmative, he uttered a growl of
satisfaction, and replacing his head upon the pillow, resumed the
slumbers which her arrival had interrupted.

It was fortunate for her that the possession of money occasioned him so
much employment next day in the way of eating and drinking; and withal
had so beneficial an effect in smoothing down the asperities of his
temper; that he had neither time nor inclination to be very critical
upon her behaviour and deportment. That she had all the abstracted and
nervous manner of one who is on the eve of some bold and hazardous
step, which it has required no common struggle to resolve upon, would
have been obvious to the lynx-eyed Fagin, who would most probably have
taken the alarm at once; but Mr. Sikes lacking the niceties of
discrimination, and being troubled with no more subtle misgivings than
those which resolve themselves into a dogged roughness of behaviour
towards everybody; and being, furthermore, in an unusually amiable
condition, as has been already observed; saw nothing unusual in her
demeanor, and indeed, troubled himself so little about her, that, had
her agitation been far more perceptible than it was, it would have been
very unlikely to have awakened his suspicions.

As that day closed in, the girl's excitement increased; and, when night
came on, and she sat by, watching until the housebreaker should drink
himself asleep, there was an unusual paleness in her cheek, and a fire
in her eye, that even Sikes observed with astonishment.

Mr. Sikes being weak from the fever, was lying in bed, taking hot water
with his gin to render it less inflammatory; and had pushed his glass
towards Nancy to be replenished for the third or fourth time, when
these symptoms first struck him.

"What foolery is this?" demanded Sikes, grasping her by the arm, and
shaking her roughly. "What is it? What do you mean? What are you
thinking of?"

The tone of forced gaiety in which the last words were spoken, seemed
to produce a deeper impression on Sikes than the wild and rigid look
which had preceded them.

"I tell you wot it is," said Sikes; "if you haven't caught the fever,
and got it comin" on, now, there's something more than usual in the
wind, and something dangerous too. You're not a-going to--. No,
damme! you wouldn't do that!"

"There ain't," said Sikes, fixing his eyes upon her, and muttering the
words to himself; "there ain't a stauncher-hearted gal going, or I'd
have cut her throat three months ago. She's got the fever coming on;
that's it."

Fortifying himself with this assurance, Sikes drained the glass to the
bottom, and then, with many grumbling oaths, called for his physic.
The girl jumped up, with great alacrity; poured it quickly out, but
with her back towards him; and held the vessel to his lips, while he
drank off the contents.

The girl obeyed. Sikes, locking her hand in his, fell back upon the
pillow: turning his eyes upon her face. They closed; opened again;
closed once more; again opened. He shifted his position restlessly;
and, after dozing again, and again, for two or three minutes, and as
often springing up with a look of terror, and gazing vacantly about
him, was suddenly stricken, as it were, while in the very attitude of
rising, into a deep and heavy sleep. The grasp of his hand relaxed;
the upraised arm fell languidly by his side; and he lay like one in a
profound trance.

She hastily dressed herself in her bonnet and shawl: looking fearfully
round, from time to time, as if, despite the sleeping draught, she
expected every moment to feel the pressure of Sikes's heavy hand upon
her shoulder; then, stooping softly over the bed, she kissed the
robber's lips; and then opening and closing the room-door with
noiseless touch, hurried from the house.

"Those were his words," said Nancy, glancing uneasily round, as she had
scarcely ceased to do, since she began to speak, for a vision of Sikes
haunted her perpetually. "And more. When he spoke of you and the other
lady, and said it seemed contrived by Heaven, or the devil, against
him, that Oliver should come into your hands, he laughed, and said
there was some comfort in that too, for how many thousands and hundreds
of thousands of pounds would you not give, if you had them, to know who
your two-legged spaniel was."

Upon the night when Nancy, having lulled Mr. Sikes to sleep, hurried on
her self-imposed mission to Rose Maylie, there advanced towards London,
by the Great North Road, two persons, upon whom it is expedient that
this history should bestow some attention.

Adept as she was, in all the arts of cunning and dissimulation, the
girl Nancy could not wholly conceal the effect which the knowledge of
the step she had taken, wrought upon her mind. She remembered that
both the crafty Jew and the brutal Sikes had confided to her schemes,
which had been hidden from all others: in the full confidence that she
was trustworthy and beyond the reach of their suspicion. Vile as those
schemes were, desperate as were their originators, and bitter as were
her feelings towards Fagin, who had led her, step by step, deeper and
deeper down into an abyss of crime and misery, whence was no escape;
still, there were times when, even towards him, she felt some
relenting, lest her disclosure should bring him within the iron grasp
he had so long eluded, and he should fall at last--richly as he merited
such a fate--by her hand.

But, these were the mere wanderings of a mind unable wholly to detach
itself from old companions and associations, though enabled to fix
itself steadily on one object, and resolved not to be turned aside by
any consideration. Her fears for Sikes would have been more powerful
inducements to recoil while there was yet time; but she had stipulated
that her secret should be rigidly kept, she had dropped no clue which
could lead to his discovery, she had refused, even for his sake, a
refuge from all the guilt and wretchedness that encompasses her--and
what more could she do! She was resolved.

It was Sunday night, and the bell of the nearest church struck the
hour. Sikes and the Jew were talking, but they paused to listen. The
girl looked up from the low seat on which she crouched, and listened
too. Eleven.

"An hour this side of midnight," said Sikes, raising the blind to look
out and returning to his seat. "Dark and heavy it is too. A good night
for business this."

"You're right for once," replied Sikes gruffly. "It is a pity, for I"m
in the humour too."

"We must make up for lost time when we"ve got things into a good train.
That's all I know," said Sikes.

"Does you good, does it!" cried Sikes. "Well, so be it."

"I don't feel like myself when you lay that withered old claw on my
shoulder, so take it away," said Sikes, casting off the Jew's hand.

"Reminds me of being nabbed by the devil," returned Sikes. "There never
was another man with such a face as yours, unless it was your father,
and I suppose _he_ is singeing his grizzled red beard by this time,
unless you came straight from the old "un without any father at all
betwixt you; which I shouldn't wonder at, a bit."

Fagin offered no reply to this compliment: but, pulling Sikes by the
sleeve, pointed his finger towards Nancy, who had taken advantage of
the foregoing conversation to put on her bonnet, and was now leaving
the room.

"Hallo!" cried Sikes. "Nance. Where's the gal going to at this time
of night?"

"What answer's that?" retorted Sikes. "Do you hear me?"

"Then I do," said Sikes, more in the spirit of obstinacy than because
he had any real objection to the girl going where she listed.
"Nowhere. Sit down."

"Put your head out of the winder," replied Sikes.

"Then you won't have it," replied Sikes. With which assurance he rose,
locked the door, took the key out, and pulling her bonnet from her
head, flung it up to the top of an old press. "There," said the
robber. "Now stop quietly where you are, will you?"

"Know what I"m--Oh!" cried Sikes, turning to Fagin, "she's out of her
senses, you know, or she daren't talk to me in that way."

"No!" said Sikes.

"Hear you!" repeated Sikes turning round in his chair to confront her.
"Aye! And if I hear you for half a minute longer, the dog shall have
such a grip on your throat as'll tear some of that screaming voice out.
Wot has come over you, you jade! Wot is it?"

"Cut my limbs off one by one!" cried Sikes, seizing her roughly by the
arm, "If I don't think the gal's stark raving mad. Get up."

"Not till you let me go--not till you let me go--Never--never!"
screamed the girl. Sikes looked on, for a minute, watching his
opportunity, and suddenly pinioning her hands dragged her, struggling
and wrestling with him by the way, into a small room adjoining, where
he sat himself on a bench, and thrusting her into a chair, held her
down by force. She struggled and implored by turns until twelve
o"clock had struck, and then, wearied and exhausted, ceased to contest
the point any further. With a caution, backed by many oaths, to make
no more efforts to go out that night, Sikes left her to recover at
leisure and rejoined Fagin.

"Wot did she take it into her head to go out to-night for, do you
think?" asked Sikes. "Come; you should know her better than me. Wot
does it mean?"

"Well, I suppose it is," growled Sikes. "I thought I had tamed her,
but she's as bad as ever."

"Nor I," said Sikes. "I think she's got a touch of that fever in her
blood yet, and it won't come out--eh?"

"I'll let her a little blood, without troubling the doctor, if she's
took that way again," said Sikes.

"She was hanging about me all day, and night too, when I was stretched
on my back; and you, like a blackhearted wolf as you are, kept yourself
aloof," said Sikes. "We was poor too, all the time, and I think, one
way or other, it's worried and fretted her; and that being shut up here
so long has made her restless--eh?"

"Why, now she's on the other tack!" exclaimed Sikes, turning a look of
excessive surprise on his companion.

Fagin nodded to him to take no further notice just then; and, in a few
minutes, the girl subsided into her accustomed demeanour. Whispering
Sikes that there was no fear of her relapsing, Fagin took up his hat
and bade him good-night. He paused when he reached the room-door, and
looking round, asked if somebody would light him down the dark stairs.

"Light him down," said Sikes, who was filling his pipe. "It's a pity he
should break his neck himself, and disappoint the sight-seers. Show
him a light."

There was another, and a darker object, to be gained. Sikes knew too
much, and his ruffian taunts had not galled Fagin the less, because the
wounds were hidden. The girl must know, well, that if she shook him
off, she could never be safe from his fury, and that it would be surely
wreaked--to the maiming of limbs, or perhaps the loss of life--on the
object of her more recent fancy.

But perhaps she would recoil from a plot to take the life of Sikes, and
that was one of the chief ends to be attained. "How," thought Fagin, as
he crept homeward, "can I increase my influence with her? What new
power can I acquire?"

Such brains are fertile in expedients. If, without extracting a
confession from herself, he laid a watch, discovered the object of her
altered regard, and threatened to reveal the whole history to Sikes (of
whom she stood in no common fear) unless she entered into his designs,
could he not secure her compliance?

Indeed they were. Mortification at the overthrow of his notable
scheme; hatred of the girl who had dared to palter with strangers; and
utter distrust of the sincerity of her refusal to yield him up; bitter
disappointment at the loss of his revenge on Sikes; the fear of
detection, and ruin, and death; and a fierce and deadly rage kindled by
all; these were the passionate considerations which, following close
upon each other with rapid and ceaseless whirl, shot through the brain
of Fagin, as every evil thought and blackest purpose lay working at his
heart.

The bell rang gently as he spoke. He crept upstairs to the door, and
presently returned accompanied by a man muffled to the chin, who
carried a bundle under one arm. Sitting down and throwing back his
outer coat, the man displayed the burly frame of Sikes.

"Wot now?" cried Sikes. "Wot do you look at a man so for?"

"Damme!" said Sikes, feeling in his breast with a look of alarm. "He's
gone mad. I must look to myself here."

"Oh, you haven't, haven't you?" said Sikes, looking sternly at him, and
ostentatiously passing a pistol into a more convenient pocket. "That's
lucky--for one of us. Which one that is, don't matter."

Sikes looked with an aspect of great perplexity into the Jew's face,
and reading no satisfactory explanation of the riddle there, clenched
his coat collar in his huge hand and shook him soundly.

Sikes turned round to where Noah was sleeping, as if he had not
previously observed him. "Well!" he said, resuming his former position.

"What then!" replied Sikes; with a tremendous oath. "If he was left
alive till I came, I'd grind his skull under the iron heel of my boot
into as many grains as there are hairs upon his head."

"I don't know," replied Sikes, clenching his teeth and turning white at
the mere suggestion. "I'd do something in the jail that "ud get me put
in irons; and if I was tried along with you, I'd fall upon you with
them in the open court, and beat your brains out afore the people. I
should have such strength," muttered the robber, poising his brawny
arm, "that I could smash your head as if a loaded waggon had gone over
it."

"I don't care who," replied Sikes impatiently. "Whoever it was, I'd
serve them the same."

Fagin looked hard at the robber; and, motioning him to be silent,
stooped over the bed upon the floor, and shook the sleeper to rouse
him. Sikes leant forward in his chair: looking on with his hands upon
his knees, as if wondering much what all this questioning and
preparation was to end in.

"Wot d'ye mean?" asked Sikes, drawing back.

"Tell me that again--once again, just for him to hear," said the Jew,
pointing to Sikes as he spoke.

"That about-- _Nancy_," said Fagin, clutching Sikes by the wrist, as if
to prevent his leaving the house before he had heard enough. "You
followed her?"

"Again. Tell it again!" cried Fagin, tightening his grasp on Sikes,
and brandishing his other hand aloft, as the foam flew from his lips.

"They asked her," said Noah, who, as he grew more wakeful, seemed to
have a dawning perception who Sikes was, "they asked her why she didn't
come, last Sunday, as she promised. She said she couldn't."

"Hell's fire!" cried Sikes, breaking fiercely from the Jew. "Let me
go!"

"Let me out," said Sikes. "Don't speak to me; it's not safe. Let me
out, I say!"

Sikes made no reply; but, pulling open the door, of which Fagin had
turned the lock, dashed into the silent streets.

"Let it be," said Sikes, thrusting his hand before her. "There's enough
light for wot I"ve got to do."

"Hah!" cried Sikes starting up. "Give that back."

The man got no further, for Sikes with a hideous imprecation overthrew
the table, and tearing the hat from him, burst out of the house.

Sikes remained standing in the street, apparently unmoved by what he
had just heard, and agitated by no stronger feeling than a doubt where
to go. At length he went back again, and took the road which leads
from Hatfield to St. Albans.

"Do you hear me call? Come here!" cried Sikes.

The animal came up from the very force of habit; but as Sikes stooped
to attach the handkerchief to his throat, he uttered a low growl and
started back.

The dog wagged his tail, but moved not. Sikes made a running noose and
called him again.

While he was thus engaged, and the two men sat by in silence with their
eyes fixed upon the floor, a pattering noise was heard upon the stairs,
and Sikes's dog bounded into the room. They ran to the window,
downstairs, and into the street. The dog had jumped in at an open
window; he made no attempt to follow them, nor was his master to be
seen.

Crackit went down to the door, and returned followed by a man with the
lower part of his face buried in a handkerchief, and another tied over
his head under his hat. He drew them slowly off. Blanched face,
sunken eyes, hollow cheeks, beard of three days" growth, wasted flesh,
short thick breath; it was the very ghost of Sikes.

"Damn you all!" said Sikes, passing his hand across his forehead.

"You that keep this house," said Sikes, turning his face to Crackit,
"do you mean to sell me, or to let me lie here till this hunt is over?"

Sikes carried his eyes slowly up the wall behind him: rather trying to
turn his head than actually doing it: and said, "Is--it--the body--is
it buried?"

Crackit intimated, by a motion of his hand as he left the room, that
there was nothing to fear; and directly came back with Charley Bates
behind him. Sikes sat opposite the door, so that the moment the boy
entered the room he encountered his figure.

"Toby," said the boy falling back, as Sikes turned his eyes towards
him, "why didn't you tell me this, downstairs?"

"Charley!" said Sikes, stepping forward. "Don't you--don't you know
me?"

The man stopped half-way, and they looked at each other; but Sikes's
eyes sunk gradually to the ground.

The contest, however, was too unequal to last long. Sikes had him
down, and his knee was on his throat, when Crackit pulled him back with
a look of alarm, and pointed to the window. There were lights gleaming
below, voices in loud and earnest conversation, the tramp of hurried
footsteps--endless they seemed in number--crossing the nearest wooden
bridge. One man on horseback seemed to be among the crowd; for there
was the noise of hoofs rattling on the uneven pavement. The gleam of
lights increased; the footsteps came more thickly and noisily on.
Then, came a loud knocking at the door, and then a hoarse murmur from
such a multitude of angry voices as would have made the boldest quail.

"Open the door of some place where I can lock this screeching
Hell-babe," cried Sikes fiercely; running to and fro, and dragging the
boy, now, as easily as if he were an empty sack. "That door. Quick!"
He flung him in, bolted it, and turned the key. "Is the downstairs
door fast?"

"For the love of God," said Mr. Brownlow solemnly, "do not say that
now, upon the very verge of death; but tell me where they are. You
know that Sikes is dead; that Monks has confessed; that there is no
hope of any further gain. Where are those papers?"

Master Charles Bates, appalled by Sikes's crime, fell into a train of
reflection whether an honest life was not, after all, the best.
Arriving at the conclusion that it certainly was, he turned his back
upon the scenes of the past, resolved to amend it in some new sphere of
action. He struggled hard, and suffered much, for some time; but,
having a contented disposition, and a good purpose, succeeded in the
end; and, from being a farmer's drudge, and a carrier's lad, he is now
the merriest young grazier in all Northamptonshire.

